Innovating

Innovating

A Doer’s Manifesto 
for Starting from a Hunch, 
Prototyping Problems, 
Scaling Up, and Learning 
to Be Productively Wrong

Luis Perez-Breva 
Artwork by Nick Fuhrer

Foreword by Edward Roberts

THE MIT PRESS 

  CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 

  LONDON, ENGLAND

© 2016 Luis Perez-Breva

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical 
means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in 
writing from the publisher.

This book was set in Garamond and Trade Gothic by the MIT Press. Printed and bound in the  
United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Perez-Breva, Luis, author.
Title: Innovating : a doer’s manifesto for starting from a hunch, prototyping 
   problems, scaling up, and learning to be productively wrong / Luis 
   Perez-Breva ; foreword by Edward Roberts.
Description: Cambridge, MA : MIT Press, [2016] | Includes bibliographical 
   references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016017241 | ISBN 9780262035354 (hardcover : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Creative ability in business. | Problem solving. | New 
   products. | Technological innovations. | Entrepreneurship.
Classification: LCC HD53 .P4694 2016 | DDC 658.4/063--dc23 LC record available  
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016017241

10  9  8  7  6 

5  4 

3  2 

1

to Erin, to Owen, to Marta ... my board of directors

contents

Foreword by Edward Roberts 
Acknowledgments 
Introduction 
xvii

xiii

ix

Part I:  Anatomy of a Hunch  1 
1  Being Productively Wrong  7
2  Prototyping a Real-World Problem  37

Part II:  Exploring in Foresight: Learning from Parts and People  75
3  Interacting with Parts  81
4  Interfacing with People  123
5  At a Small Scale, Nonlinearity Is Your Ally  145
6  A Kit to Drive Innovation, Anywhere  161
7  Operating on a Problem through Trial and Error  193

Part III:  Organizing What You’ve Learned: Exploring Impact  223
8  Practicing Advocacy  231
9  Risk, Doing, Learning, and Uncertainty  261
10  Scaling Up an Organization  285
11  Managing Innovating Continuously  311
12  The World Is Your Lab: You Need a Notebook to Converse with Yourself  331

Epilogue: Academic Commentary  353

Bounded Rationality and Behavioral Decision Making  353
Bridging with Artificial Intelligence  355
Iterations and the Induction Argument  357
Kits, DIY, and Experimentation  359
Kuhn versus Popper  363
Learning and Innovating  365
No Thing Is New  371
The Nonlinear Nature of Innovation  372 
Organizational Theory and Computation  374
Parts and Modularity  374
People and Teams  375
Problem Solving  377
The Relationship among Scale, Execution, and Organization Building  379

Notes  383
Index  387

foreword  
Edward Roberts

I’ve  spent  more  than  50  years  building  entrepreneurship  and  innovation  
research and teaching at MIT, combined with countless experiences found-
ing, advising, and investing in many tens of new and growing enterprises—
and I find every page of Innovating a treasure trove of fascinating new per-
spectives and insights. Just look at the subtitle of this wonderful book about 
doing Luis Perez-Breva has created: “A Doer’s Manifesto for Starting from a 
Hunch, Prototyping Problems, Scaling Up, and Learning to Be Productively 
Wrong.” Other than “scaling up”—which, of course, Luis treats differently 
than you may be used to (including even talking about “scaling down”)—
have you ever seen those words used to frame a treatise on how to innovate?
Let’s start from the underlying thrust of the book: What is the knowl-
edge or evidence one needs to make a problem real, find one or more appro-
priate and effective solutions, and bring a chosen solution forward into prac-
tice? Luis tells us to begin with a “hunch.” Wait a minute!! This is MIT!!! 
Isn’t he going to expound upon the scientific basis for innovating? Isn’t he 
going to lay out a series of formulaic steps to make us the fortunes we seek, or 
at least get us to our desired solutions? No, “starting with a hunch” is where 
readers  will  begin  to  sense  that  they  are  in  for  a  very  different  learning 
experience.

Think about “hunches”: a hunch about what might be a problem you 
really  want  to  be  tackling;  a  hunch  about  approaches  that  might  help  in 

solving a problem; a hunch about the “parts” (his word) that would go into a 
search for a solution and into the solution itself; a hunch about the kinds of 
people you will need as you make progress at each stage; a hunch about when 
and how to carry out your possible (eventual?) fundraising, and so on. Luis 
doesn’t confront you with some bold answer to your needs. Instead, he chal-
lenges you to recognize how much you don’t know at each phase of your in-
novating activity and how much (valuable) uncertainty there is as you move 
forward. And then he helps you steadily to understand better how to pro-
ceed in your search and decide whether you want to move ahead—and if so, 
how. The path to impact is fraught with near misses and learning. 

So, here’s a guy who doesn’t follow the path of most books on entrepre-
neuring (there aren’t many books on how to innovate!) in which the author 
exhorts you to follow his revealed wisdom as he tells you the “secret” of how 
he made his first hundred million or his first billion dollars! Instead, Luis—a 
very experienced and pragmatically focused teacher—shows you how he has 
brought students and people in companies of all ages and with different lev-
els of experience and knowledge further along in their quest to solve prob-
lems. And if you are starting from just a hunch, then clearly you should ex-
pect you will often be wrong—which is fine.

The book proceeds from that kind of thought process to become an aid 
to your search for solutions to real-world problems, whether product or pro-
cess or social issue or organizational design. The author takes the same ap-
proach to all of these, and repeatedly offers examples selected from that diver-
sity to help you better understand how to innovate in many contexts.

An underlying “philosophy” (my label) throughout this book is modesty 
about how much you can know when you are trying to do something that you 
want to be different from what exists. Luis says that in reality both the prob-
lem itself and its solution are often discovered as part of the innovating pro-
cess. That is a far cry from providing a formula needing only plug-ins. And in 
his advice on the process to follow, he draws many non-obvious conclusions. 
For example, if the “real problem” you first identified seems too big to tackle 
immediately, perhaps you need to formulate your problem at a smaller scale 
than you had imagined so you can start working on that lesser reality.

x 

FOREWORD

One big thing Luis continually asks of you is to reexamine what you be-
lieve is the logical next step, using simple words that need defining in the 
context (which he does for you). What are “parts” of a problem and its pro-
spective solution? They are, of course, the list of all those elements that show 
up in a piecemeal taking apart of a device you might want to build, but also 
those elements of an organization you might need to construct, and as well 
of the assembly of people you might require to determine a solution and 
then implement it. And even then, more details are desirable. For example, 
there are the  “sub-parts” people bring in— information, capabilities, and 
skills; these, too, become parts for specific consideration. Luis wants you to 
be explicit about all of these, and encourages you to seek out as many of these 
parts  in  simple,  nearby,  approximate  and  inexpensive  forms,  to  help  you 
move along with what you are trying to do. It is again the modesty of manner 
that permits you to go forward with little resources and with continuity.

Luis is himself extremely innovative in presenting the concept of “inno-
vation prototyping” and elaborating how to construct a “kit” for that pro-
cess. He writes that it will have “a hunch dressed as a problem, a set of accessible 
parts, pointers to impact, pointers to people, and a primer on how to work on 
the parts and the impact at scale.” Every one of those highlighted concepts 
(my emphasis) demonstrates a toe-in-the-water starting approach for even-
tually accomplishing a significant goal.

The author reminds you frequently that your purpose is always to find 
out how you are wrong, so you can then think about a proper next step of 
inquiry and action. He remarks that “failing sooner buys you time, and mon-
ey!” while insisting that, of course, you will “fail” (be wrong? make mistakes?) 
in every stage of your endeavor. And he often does this with wholly unantici-
pated uniqueness. His presentation of “Fundraising as Advocacy” in a ballet 
in three movements (!) is an outrageous and absolutely fascinating way to 
communicate a process that is so awkward and time consuming and yet es-
sential to all forms of innovating.

Let me comment about my experience of reading the book (and you’ll no 
doubt go back and reread some of the chapters more than once to be sure 
you’ve  got  it  right).  Each  chapter  has  multiple  boxes  that  illustrate  and 

 

FOREWORD 

xi

expand the message of the main text. The examples in the boxes range over 
fields of human endeavor from creativity to science to inventions to indus-
trial and technological history. Their breadth brings home the points Luis is 
making. Each chapter has highlighted quotes as you move along to help you 
capture the essence of the arguments being made. Each chapter ends with 
“takeaways”  that  synopsize  the  main  points  you  should  have  understood. 
They prod you to return and reread some part of the chapter that in after-
thought seems important enough to reexamine. Each chapter also ends with 
a splendid illustration that creatively integrates all the major considerations 
of the chapter. The artwork is quite imaginative, and some readers will find 
the illustrations to be further stimulants of their thinking. The epilogue pro-
vides academic commentary that directs you to underlying data, to deeper 
reading opportunities, and to further explanations.

If you want, you can just read the takeaways at the end of all the chapters. 
They  will  give  you  continuity  and  will  clearly  present  the  essence  of  the 
book’s uniqueness of thought. You would get a boatload of ideas and insights. 
But you will have missed the enormous content about doing, and the subtle-
ties that no doubt will make the difference in whether you can really follow 
Luis  Perez-Breva’s  own  guidance  to  your  innovating  success:  “…  bringing  
together parts, people, and scale in a way not done before [is] something you 
do continually; innovation is the afterthought.”
I hope you enjoy this book as much as I did.

Edward Roberts is David Sarnoff Professor of Management of Technology, Sloan 
School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Founder and Chair, MIT 
Entrepreneurship Center (now named the Martin Trust Center for MIT Entrepreneurship)

xii 

FOREWORD

acknowledgments

The story of how this book came to be begins in Fall 2012 with a comment 
from my friend and mentor, Professor Charles Cooney of MIT: “I think you 
may have a book.” I have Charlie to thank for a lot, from giving me the op-
portunity back in 2007 to begin building innovating as a new field to seed-
ing the hunch that gave rise to this book.

Professor Edward Roberts of MIT had an overwhelmingly positive reac-
tion after reading the manuscript and wrote a foreword that is a far better 
endorsement of my work than I could ever have hoped for. I am deeply grate-
ful for Ed’s caring and straightforward mentoring, and for the knowledge 
that I can always trust Ed to tell me when he thinks I am wrong—the attri-
bute I value most in people.

I have many students, colleagues, and friends to thank for the opportu-
nity to develop this field by “doing.” I must single out the opportunity I was 
given to develop a month-long Innovation Workshop—evolved from col-
laborations across the globe—for the new Skolkovo Institute of Science and 
Technology. It was Skoltech’s first course offering ever (given at MIT)  
and has since become the entry experience for all incoming students on the 
campus in Russia.

Worldwide, more than 3,000 individuals ranging from undergraduates 
to senior executives have experienced different aspects of the book’s content 

through my teaching. Their sharp questions and insights have made me bet-
ter. I am indebted to them all for keeping me honest.

I knew nothing about writing a book. Following the “hunch” (a central 
concept in this book) that grew out of Charlie’s comment, and my own ad-
vice, I “sought out people” (another central concept) who knew far more 
about writing books than me. I found many. I am especially grateful to Gita 
Manaktala and John Covell of the MIT Press for educating me and support-
ing me on the steps from that hunch to book proposal over a two-year peri-
od.  Among  other  MIT  Press  staff,  I  am  particularly  indebted  to  Emily 
Taber—who  took  over  as  my  acquisitions  editor  when  John  retired—for 
making everything happen.

Many  others  helped  me  along  that  process  with  support,  advice,  and 
sometimes patient tolerance of my inclination for hyperbole and finding a 
path for every idea to evolve into an absurd plan for world domination (you 
know who this is for): Prof. Duane Boning, Maren Cattonar, Elizabeth Coo-
per, Kelly Courtney, Daniela Couto, Prof. Ed Crawley, Ilia Dubinsky, Jose 
Estabil, Gadi Geiger, Bryan Haslam, Prof. Douglas Hart, Tylor Hess, Chris-
topher Holland, Winston Larson, Marilyn Levine, Katey Lo, Mariana  
Matus, Vicente Montes, Lisa Natkin, Andrew “Ozz” Oswald, Amadeo  
Petitbò,  Julian  Rodriguez,  Rosangela  dos  Santos,  Harry  Schechter,  Jim 
Schumacher,  Patrice  Selles,  Prof.  Maurizio  Sobrero,  Diane  Soderholm, 
Prof. Bruce Tidor, and Rebecca Walsh. Not helpful was Ignatius J. Reilly.

I must also acknowledge MIT for giving me the opportunity to deploy in 
classes and workshops the thinking that underlies this book, and particularly 
to evolve iTeams into an innovation reactor from which we’ve steered more 
than 150 MIT technologies to impact. The challenges of navigating the 
strong disciplinary silos at MIT steeled my resolve to advance with my ideas 
and this book project. Future-me will be thankful for that.

Two people deserve a special mention:
Scott Cooper has been my editor; I am most grateful for his dedication, 
astonishing attention to detail, patience, and explanations. I had no real idea 
what an editor did before I endeavored to write a book, and I’m still not sure, 
but whatever an editor is supposed to do, Scott did more: He joined me with 

xiv 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

tremendous enthusiasm, pulled no punches, taught me how to write better, 
and  worked  tirelessly  with  me  to  wield  the  English  language  into  
delivering an unassuming and forward-looking prose that makes the writing 
as direct as I perceive the content to be. Then he handled many things with 
the publisher one would expect of an agent. Thank you, Scott; it has been a 
lot  of  fun  (the  antecedent  of  it  here  is  at  once  both  “the  covenant”  and  
“future English”).

Nick Fuhrer helped me realize a vision I was told by many could not be 
achieved (“that’s not how these books are supposed to look”). His detailed 
artwork is nothing short of exquisite. I wanted to offer readers’ imaginative 
and creative side an experience that traditional diagrams (whether technical 
or simplistic) and cartoon representations simply can’t provide. I am con-
vinced Nick summoned the spirits of Escher and Dalí to produce the dy-
namic artwork that will surely help many appreciate innovating as the highly 
rewarding, industrious, yet accessible process it is. I am indebted to Nick for 
helping me realize my vision, and for making it so easy to work and translate 
the concepts I visualized into exquisite art. I am looking forward to find an 
excuse to work together again.

One last thing about my collaboration with Nick: I also knew nothing 
about talking to illustrators or even how to find one. For as long as I tried to 
find an “illustrator,” I was unable even to define what I thought I needed. At 
some point in the future, in hindsight (another important concept in the 
book), I’ll gloss over the full story of how I found Nick and will say I found 
an illustrator. But that’s not how it happened. The acknowledgements sec-
tion is not the place to begin developing the content, so suffice it to say that 
the beginning of our collaboration benefited from the same kind of happen-
stance I suggest readers embrace (chapter 4). Nick introduced himself as a 
sculptor, I spoke of myself as a doer, and it turned out we knew each other 
already. But it took a third person and a casual encounter at the Shady Hill 
School in Cambridge, Mass., for us to connect the dots. Because of that, I am 
also grateful to the Shady Hill School community.

While they did not participate directly in this project, I would also like 
to acknowledge Noubar Afeyan and Fiona Murray. The conversations we 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

xv

have had over the years in our various collaborations have made me a better 
thinker. I also thank the following people for having believed in me every 
time I transgressed a disciplinary boundary: Manlio Allegra, Michel Brune, 
Tommi Jaakkola, Enric Julià, Luis Piera, Tommy Poggio, and Ken Zolot.

Like many of you doers, I did not have the luxury of halting everything 
else to write this book. Along the process, I gave up sleep and comfort to find 
the time. I can’t imagine succeeding without the help from Susana, Pedro, 
and Maria Jose, and without the support of my parents Pilar and Jose Anto-
nio and my brothers Jose Antonio and Manuel.

Finally, three people made this book possible above all others in the three 
years that followed the hunch that began the project. My daughter Erin gra-
ciously conceded the time we typically devote to building contraptions and 
doing experiments. My son Owen has had to wait to join us in our crazy in-
ventions. And my wife Marta has always been there for me. I can’t imagine 
life without her, her unwavering support, sharp insights, and straightforward 
advice. Through the duration of this project she was also our family’s only 
practicing entrepreneur. That she managed to keep us all afloat while she  
effectively executed her senior management responsibilities in a biotech 
startup is nothing short of awe-inspiring. More important than what Marta, 
Erin,  and  Owen  gave  up  is  the  enthusiasm  with  which  they  carried  me 
through the entire project. They are my family and board of directors. And 
each one of them got to decide something about what you are about to expe-
rience. They deserve this prime spot in my acknowledgments.

xvi 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

introduction

I introduce innovation and entrepreneurship to a wide variety of audiences, 
including university students at the undergraduate and graduate levels and 
executives in companies. There’s one thing I can almost always count on: 
The audiences have already been taught to see innovation and entrepreneur-
ship as one and the same. And so, as they try to apply their skill sets to the 
subject matter, the same contradictions, paradoxes, and even sense of frustra-
tion seem to kick in—no matter their backgrounds.

I attribute this to two fundamental things. The first is an overabundance 
of so-called recipes for creating a startup or having an innovation. Students 
come to class hoping I will give them a subroutine that they will merely have 
to execute, as if they were computers. Many have been led to identify any 
experience with or instruction in preparing to “pitch” a business concept to 
others with actual preparation for conceiving a solid idea for innovation or 
executing on a business concept. The second is a general lack of acknowledg-
ment that the very same language that can be so powerful for articulating a 
business, developing a business strategy, and executing that strategy can just 
as easily mislead the aspiring innovator—especially if applied too soon to 
what generally amounts to a hunch.

After years of witnessing students making those mistakes, I have come to 
understand that this situation flows from a conflation of entrepreneurship 
and innovation—especially in academia. That conflation has led to the 

creation of a bunch of truisms that focus on managing innovations and orga-
nizations, which may be quite useful at some point, but have little or nothing 
to do with actually innovating. Put simply, we talk a lot about how innova-
tions happen and are managed, but rarely discuss how you actually produce 
one—a huge multidisciplinary space that is rarely explored. The tasks may 
require you to venture a bit into the impossible. Being empirical and experi-
mental in that space—something that may seem out of fashion but is sorely 
missing—is the subject of this book.

The field of entrepreneurship and innovation as we know it is full of 
amazing stories, inspiring trajectories, and powerful figures—ones we know 
of only in hindsight. The field is also ripe with opportunities to enter con-
tests and win awards. These “idea” events are a lot like beauty pageants; the 
pitches are the “talent competition.” They sometimes even propel forward 
aspiring entrepreneurs who have a solid, powerful idea. The key, though, is 
how solid and powerful their idea was before they entered the event. The 
pitch itself is show and tell.

Beauty pageants end with the crowning of a winner. Crowned or not, 

you still need to figure out what you’re going to do next.

As people prepare for these events centered on entrepreneurial “beauty,” 
they feel the urge to copy “beautiful”-looking, successful entrepreneurs. One 
can only wonder how many black turtlenecks, jeans, and wireless headset 
microphones are sold in advance of these events, or how many prospective 
presenters practice the line “and we launch today” in front of mirrors. But far 
more often than not, what we think we know about already successful entre-
preneurs includes very little about how they developed their ideas, how they 
assembled  and  managed  their  organizations,  or  the  struggles  they  went 
through to evolve their ideas toward impact at scale.

After all, identifying yourself as the “founder” of a business is as easy as 

paying a state’s incorporation fee.

In class, I have learned to help students recognize these contradictions 
and paradoxes by taking this archetypical conception of entrepreneurship 
and innovation to its comical extreme: I suggest they incorporate and then 
post their new status as “founders” on the social network of their choice. 

xviii 

INTRODUCTION

Sometimes I “knight” students—imaginary sword and all—as “recognized 
entrepreneurs.” I give others “official permission” to innovate. I encourage 
them to find a suitable entrepreneurial beauty pageant to enter. I congratu-
late them on their success, and then I advise it might be a good time to figure 
out what their new companies actually do.

There’s  nothing  inherently  wrong  with  the  entrepreneurship  theory 
from which my students have developed their paradoxes and contradictions. 
It’s just that the theory is all about managing an organization that has already 
settled on its target audience(s).

An aspiring entrepreneur or innovator lives at N = 1. The merits of her or his 
innovation  or  organization  will  be  measured  relative  to  adoption,  not  by 
comparison with other innovators or entrepreneurs. The one problem that 
gives her or him purpose has to be solved with the resources at hand and at 
scale—it all needs to work. It does not really matter whether the way the 
problem is ultimately solved falls at the center of some graphical distribution 
of entrepreneurial performance or at the graph’s tail end.

The statistics pertaining to who entrepreneurs are or how they perform 
do not really apply. That is a limitation of statistics as the chosen method, 
not  a  problem  with  the  underlying  research.  The  keywords  and  concepts 
used to map entrepreneurial ideas are indexed by the final outcome—a suc-
cessful startup, a product, an innovation, an enterprise, or more generally the 
establishment  of  any  kind  of  organization—not  by  the  initial  premise, 
knowledge, and resources of the entrepreneurs studied.

Keywords and highly specialized concepts such as need, product, distri-
bution, value chain, users, lead users, competitive forces, value creation, and 
value capture do not have meanings set in stone. At the beginning of an in-
novator’s inquiry, they are largely undefined and ambiguous; they acquire 
their precise meanings and their analytical strength only over time through 
the inquiry of the innovator, from the organization that emerges, and in the 
context of the problem that organization ultimately solves. It’s like thermo-
dynamics:  We  don’t  need  to  understand  the  science  to  enjoy  an  iced 

 

INTRODUCTION 

xix

beverage, but if we ever need to maintain temperature constant for a brief 
while, the knowledge that temperature remains constant during the transi-
tion from liquid to solid may be critical.

It is easy for aspiring entrepreneurs to characterize their ideas using their 
best understanding of those concepts in the abstract. It is more difficult for 
them to realize that whatever they end up with may walk and quack like a 
startup but not yet be a startup. The business concept they may produce re-
mains a good aspirational destination to guide their inquiry, but that’s all. I 
encounter this time and again in class: Incipient entrepreneurs confuse their 
initial guess of a destination with an actual plan of action.

Unfortunately, it’s easy to fall in love with the craft that goes into articu-
lating a concept using precise technical management terms while losing sight 
of the job ahead. It’s the same as burying yourself in technical jargon from 
whatever field you’ve been working in. Both are excellent examples of over-
engineering—something every engineer is strongly encouraged to avoid.

This is not a shortcoming of the literature of management or that of 
product design. It is a sign that other fields of inquiry—particularly those 
concerned with engineering, with high technology, with science, with tin-
kering, and more generally with the synthesis of new ideas—have yet to offer 
viable strategies for you to engage in entrepreneurship and innovation that 
are compatible with that world view. In a way, entrepreneurship and innova-
tion emerged first as a scientific and management field, but they still lack an 
experimental and engineering footing. Chemistry went through this same 
process before chemical engineering emerged. A symptom of this lack is that 
we see more people concerned with idea selection than we see people con-
cerned with actually producing innovations.

The real impact of this shortcoming is that more and more aspiring en-
trepreneurs and innovators focus on new consumer products and on leverag-
ing reasonably commoditized technologies (e.g., the Web and apps). Mean-
while, fewer pay attention to opportunities in more complex systems and 
new technologies or use either to conceive entirely new categories of activity. 
They also fail to address meaningfully how to scale up their ideas until they 

xx 

INTRODUCTION

become viable business concepts to which they could then apply what they 
have learned (or can learn) about management and entrepreneurship.

This situation persists because the literature and the lessons aspiring en-
trepreneurs and innovators are applying are intrinsically analytical and statis-
tical  and  so  are  most  conducive  to  identifying  arbitrage  opportunities  in 
well-outlined industries centered on well-identified markets or users. The 
“toolbox” is biased toward the analysis of what already exists. If an aspiring 
entrepreneur wants to use the same tools to conceive a new market, to dis-
cover an actual real-world problem, or to untangle the complexity of an in-
dustry to reveal new opportunities, he or she may discover that the tools de-
mand  a  significant  dose  of  creativity  just  to  overcome  that  “bias.”  That’s 
creativity that is not directly applied to innovating but to make recipes work 
for something other than what they were intended. We might as well equip 
aspiring  entrepreneurs  with  broader  knowledge  about  producing  innova-
tions so they can channel that same creativity more effectively.

Again, an aspiring entrepreneur or innovator lives at N=1, and where he 
or she lands in a distribution of innovators is immaterial. That isn’t the objec-
tive. What an aspiring entrepreneur or innovator needs to do is synthesize 
one robust idea—a space of opportunity—and make that work.

A few words regarding this book’s tone are warranted. 

Much of the language used to describe innovation concepts is contami-
nated by knowledge of the end points of innovation stories. The contamina-
tion renders these concepts useless, even if they are accurate and useful for 
the analysis of entrepreneurship and innovation stories in hindsight. Entre-
preneurs and innovators, however, operate in a highly dynamic environment. 
That makes static concepts difficult to apply. I see the contamination mani-
fested in some questions from students that really boil down to this: “Would 
you please now give me the solution at the end of the book?”

I see the same problem elsewhere. Knowing the specific mathematical 
formula or model constructed to summarize a specific piece of knowledge 

 

INTRODUCTION 

xxi

does not immediately translate into understanding the phenomena that un-
derlie that formula or model. Just as an innovation story has an end point, 
that  formula  is  an  endpoint.  Students  can  apply  it  skillfully  without  ever 
learning  to  recognize  the  wide  variety  of  situations  in  which  the  original 
knowledge might apply.

An  innovator  can  rapidly  make  lots  of  guesses  about  business  model, 
value, value proposition, user, and product and get to a semblance of a new 
venture. Once there, though, it becomes inordinately difficult to unbundle 
the guesses. The concepts are correct, but if used too early they may fool in-
novators into mistaking their guesses and the structure built around them 
for actual evidence of an opportunity. Worse yet, the same tools that result in 
a guess about an opportunity may not be the tools needed to unbundle that 
opportunity for the purpose of further experimentation. So, in this book I 
avoid this “contaminated” language in early chapters and focus instead on an 
approach to synthesize solutions to real-world problems. I offer strategies for 
connecting the results of the readers’ own inquiries to those concepts in later 
chapters, after readers have a strong basis upon which to build and evolve 
their ideas and thus are more likely to apply and use those words in the ways 
they were originally intended. As the reader’s inquiry into a problem pro-
gresses, using those words will become critical to adding the last layer of de-
tail to whatever “innovation” is proposed.

The  subject  of  entrepreneurship  and  innovation  is  tightly  linked  to  a 
promise of economic growth, generally through the development of an orga-
nization. That strong connection may make my decision to avoid the “con-
taminated” language I mention above seem odd, and may invite criticism. 
My choice stems from an observation: Whatever the “innovation endeavor” 
my students engage in after we first meet, every endeavor is best character-
ized by everything there was left to learn about the problem they wanted to 
solve than by any disciplinary technique they brought to it at the outset—no 
matter how skilled they may be. This choice likely reflects my bias: I under-
stand innovation better as an outcome of an industrious learning process 
that cannot be fully comprehended from the safety afforded by the method-
ologies of any one discipline alone. I want readers to enjoy innovating as a 

xxii 

INTRODUCTION

learning process, one that can be practiced and that benefits from multiple 
disciplines and viewpoints. The basis for this motivation is my own experi-
ence innovating, and teaching many others to innovate, on various levels and 
across multiple disciplinary domains.

Shying away from technical jargon allows me to begin the story for this book 
at the very beginning of innovating, when everything amounts to a hunch. 
The chapters in the book follow a sequence that is consequent with that 
choice, building the concepts for innovating from the perspective of an unas-
suming doer.

That said, each chapter is written so it can also be read for future refer-
ence independent of other chapters, or in a newly created chapter sequence—
that is, different than as published here—to suit the reader’s specific pur-
poses or “beginning.” Reading chapters out of sequence can reveal different 
perspectives on innovating. For instance, beginning with chapter 6 and then 
reading chapters 11 and 12 reveals a story about how to implement this ap-
proach to innovating as a process in innovation management. Building on 
that sequence, the remaining chapters provide an innovation manager with 
specific  strategies  to  help  innovators  progress  through  the  process  from 
hunch to decision.

The “takeaways” at the end of chapters should make it easy to develop 
your own sorting function. Cross-references to other chapters should help 
you design your own path through the book. The academic commentary in 
the book’s epilogue relates the concepts discussed in the chapters to the mul-
tidisciplinary literature upon which they rest.

My hope is that, after reading a few chapters, you’ll become curious about 
the subtle shift in mind-set regarding innovating that’s portrayed in the book 
and you’ll feel free to read the rest of the chapters in an order that suits your 
interests. Feel free to do so, just as Star Wars fans have come up with at least 
three different sorting functions for the episodes in the saga (release order, 

 

INTRODUCTION 

xxiii

episode order, and machete order1), each unfolding a different story line but 
all still Star Wars.

Finally, a few words on learning. I liken innovating to learning—the learning 
that occurs while you are engaged in a very general kind of problem solving, 
with no guarantee that you will come up with a solution. This is extraordi-
narily liberating. The operating question isn’t “How do I apply this frame-
work to that?” but rather “What is the knowledge or evidence I need to ac-
quire to make that problem real?”

Innovating by making real-world problems tangible offers you an alter-
native to the many innovation recipes that have emerged from product de-
sign, product marketing, lean manufacturing, and technology readiness—
the  recipes  my  students  have  in  mind  when  they  ask  the  “contaminated” 
questions. To get started, all those recipes seem to require a well-formed idea 
about a product, a user base, or an organization—that is, they require that a 
large part of your innovating be fixed before you can even begin. That feels 
suffocating to me. The urgency to “productize” every observation feels un-
necessarily constraining, and the rush to drive every action toward identify-
ing product placement opportunities feels like opportunism. Most of these 
recipes seem to take a “good idea” as a given, and hinge on convincing others 
that it is, indeed, good—and then placing it. 

That is quite the opposite of learning. This book is about learning.
My training does not seem to have prepared me well to produce new 
“good ideas” from the get-go. Instead, it has prepared me to arrive at them. I 
don’t particularly care for processes that put me in the somewhat weak posi-
tion of having to convince others that an idea is good before I myself am 
persuaded. And I am not particularly motivated to perform tasks that are 
presented primarily in terms of pleasing users or designing to their liking. I 
would rather solve a real-world problem.

xxiv 

INTRODUCTION

What I, and most of my students, seem to get are intuitions about prob-
lems—hunches—and  a  desire  to  learn  why  our  first  intuitions  are  wrong. 
Some students feel compelled to present their hunches as if they were prod-
ucts; but they are just that, hunches.

Whether you ultimately decide to engage in innovating by focusing on 
making a problem tangible, as I propose and explain in this book, or instead 
to follow one of the innovation recipes is your choice. This book doesn’t re-
place those recipes, which serve a purpose. The approach presented here is, 
though, wholly different; the concepts undergirding this book borrow noth-
ing from those other recipes. Working on the problem requires a new vo-
cabulary, a different attitude toward innovation, and a subtle mind-shift.

The book is a manifesto for doers to embrace their doing as an instru-
ment for exploration. It is also an explorer’s guide into the impossible; in 
fact, I see innovators as the explorers of our time. The book shows a path for 
exploration: Accept that you will learn by being wrong as you venture into 
the impossible in search for that thing others will come to appreciate as  
magical—an “innovation”—when your turn comes to tell your story in 
hindsight.

To be clear, I am not taking a position on whether innovation can or can-
not be learned. I just think it’s a moot discussion. I hope to persuade you that 
innovating,  like  most  other  activities,  is  something  you  can  practice  and  
become better at with the right combination of knowledge and the kind of 
muscle  memory  that  comes  from  repeating  certain  tasks—that  is,  from  
doing. Innovating takes doing, practice, and perseverance—which are how 
your brain has adapted to learn best. At some point, you ought to learn to 
trust that your brain can operate quite well outside the realm of formulas.

 

INTRODUCTION 

xxv

i

anatomy of a hunch

perhaps you have an intuition about an “innova-
tion.” Today, it may look to you like a solution—defined by a 
product, a cause to champion, a technology, a user need, a pro-
cess, an environment. It may look impossible. It can become an 
intuition about a problem. For now, it is just a hunch.

Eventually you may arrive at an innovation. But there is more 
to innovating than the hope to land on the innovation. Your fore-
cast is that there is an opportunity to do something that has not 
yet been done, that a real-world problem has yet to be solved. At 
the outset, you begin with nothing more than a hunch and what 
you already have. You can innovate from there.

Your hunch also hints at a broader space of opportunity. Most 
likely, there are multiple ways to have an impact in that space. The 
solution you imagine may be one, but for now that’s at best an as-
sumption at risk of becoming a significant constraint.

You may be inclined to bank it all on the belief that the one 

solution you imagine is right. But you do not need to.

2 

PRELUDE

At first, it may be more straightforward to find all the ways 
your hunch cannot possibly work than to try to land on an innova-
tion deductively. You can learn all the ways you can solve the prob-
lem by allowing yourself to be wrong about your hunch and find-
ing out how you are wrong. The outcome can be a robust path to 
solving a real-world problem—no matter how wrong you are at 
the outset.

Whether your innovating leads to the innovation you imag-
ined, you stand to benefit the most from going about it with a 
certain naiveté.

You  can  become  increasingly  better  at  innovating  through 
practice. All it takes is learning to distinguish what you ought to 
do from what you’ll eventually produce. The chapters in this part 
of  the  book  introduce  principles  for  doing  so.  In  a  sense,  these 
chapters are the entire book; the chapters beyond expand these 
principles into that practice.

 

PRELUDE 

3

     1
1

being productively wrong     

At its genesis, no thing about an innovation is new.

This observation will likely seem flat wrong to you. It did to me. Over 
and over, I dismissed it as a curious if not irritating paradox, until I finally 
decided to look at it in a different way. Then it became a relief: that novelty 
will reveal itself. Let me try to put that another way: Innovations accrue their 
novelty as you innovate. They are more easily deemed innovations in hind-
sight than at their beginnings. In hindsight they can be judged by how they 
ultimately empower others—a community—to achieve new things. 

If you accept that innovations hardly look new when you begin, you can 
stop searching for the next earth-shattering idea and instead just start look-
ing around for a way to fix that thing you already suspect is not quite right. 
As you do, you might unknowingly start on a path to change the world.

Still, something about an innovation not being new at the start feels par-

adoxical. I have come to find solace in time travel.

Rewind. You are now in 1960. You’ve recently seen a great comedy, Some 
Like  It  Hot,  at  the  movies.  People  are  still  debating  the  “risqué”  scene  in 

which a man dressed as a woman kisses a woman. You missed it because of 
the high hairdo of the patron in front of you, but you’re still out 70 cents for 
the ticket.

July 8, 1960. You pick up the New York Times and scan the cover. You 
read about John F. Kennedy advancing in two states ahead of the primaries; 
rivals dispute the claims of the “New Englander’s aides.” The story continues 
beneath the fold. Underneath it, in the lower left corner, a headline reads 
“Light Amplification Claimed by Scientist.” Next to it, near the bottom of 
the page, a big photograph of Congolese troops and demonstrators and a 
story about fleeing Belgians jumps out at you. 

You sigh. News as usual—politics and war. You put down the newspaper 

and decide to listen to a phonograph record.

That article about the scientist, easily missed, reports on an experiment 
from May 16: physicist Theodore Maiman at the Hughes Research Labora-
tory focused a high-powered flash lamp on a ruby rod. It is the first device 
ever to emit coherent light. Dr. Maiman just demonstrated the first working 
L.A.S.E.R. (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation). You are 
still in 1960; the significance of this news is, at best, elusive.

Fast forward. May 6, 1964. On page 69 of the Times, you catch an inter-
view with Dr. Maiman, now president of Korad, a subsidiary of Union  
Carbide that builds lasers. He describes the laser as “a solution seeking a 
problem.”

Now it’s the 1990s and you’re on your way back to the present. You see a 
TV interview with Dr. Maiman. He’s holding that first laser and reminiscing 
about his feat:

One of the things I at least attempted to do and it did turn out to be success-
ful was to use things that were already around. … If I had to develop a special 
lamp that would be a whole little research project there. … I had a crystal 
that’s not only found in nature but can be made very pure industrially. So, I 
was able get a hold of some rubies and just order them, buy them and have 
them cut. The lamp I could buy [from a photographic equipment catalogue] 
and the rest of it is just simple machining.1

8 

CHAPTER 1

Back to the present. The laser is so pervasive you may not even know 

your daily routine depends heavily on its existence.

It is disorienting that no part of that first laser was new. The laser itself, 
though, was. Theodore Maiman created his “invention” using parts he either 
found around the lab or could order easily from a supplier. The laser was still 
a long way from being recognizable by its name the way it is today. But it was 
an instant innovation within several close-knit communities. Within weeks, 
several research groups were using variants of Maiman’s design. Shortly after 
his discovery, Maiman and some colleagues left the Hughes Research Labo-
ratory for a company that produced ruby crystals, then founded Korad to sell 

At its genesis, no thing about an innovation is new.

lasers. Within a few years, lasers began to be used in welding, medical re-
search, and so on. One of the first applications reported for the laser outside 
of research in optics appeared in 1961 in a clinical research paper assessing its 
use as a replacement for a scalpel in eye surgery.

Nothing about the first laser was new—that is, not a single part, not even 

the first domain of application.

Might innovating really be that simple? You and your peers put some 
parts  together?  Someone  else,  unconcerned  with  your  parts  and  process, 
adopts your artifact and derives a benefit from its use? There you go—you 
just produced an innovation. And all you did was iteratively assemble a few 
parts—some technical and some not, initially none new—in a new way, and 
drive them to adoption by someone who is an expert at something else.

 
 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 
BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

9
9

It still took nearly two decades for the laser to find its way into a mass-
market innovation like the ones we admire and have eventually come to take 
for  granted—specifically,  as  a  component  in  bar-code  readers.  Along  the 
way, lasers made it into innovations in all sorts of contexts, in academia, and 
in numerous other industries. In 1962, a laser pulse traveled to the moon and 
back for the first time. In 1969, the Apollo 11 mission installed the first retro-
reflector on the moon, and lasers have been used to measure the distance 
from Earth to the moon ever since.

But that’s the laser story from the beginning. There is another way to tell 
that story, and it is the way “innovations” are often described: working back 
from the present. From that perspective, the laser looks quite different. It is 
no longer a note about a scientist in the New York Times, or a “light amplifi-
cation” device produced by a researcher with mostly “old” parts and nearly 
no budget, or a technology that went from cover to page 69 in four years, all 
the while becoming a “solution seeking a problem.” It is the laser—a technology 
that revolutionized several industries and society itself, and one that we now 
take for granted. Looking back from the present, it is easy to imagine the 
device being interesting from the outset, to fictionalize in our heads a dra-
matic competition to be the first to make it happen, and to imagine many 
people working on it. It is a gripping tale.

In fact, that story is also true. It is the story of how our society first encoun-
tered lasers. Billions of dollars were indeed spent on research and develop-
ment of the laser before and after Dr. Maiman’s first laser. Jeff Hecht’s book 
Beam2 thoroughly documents the history of the laser as a societal develop-
ment emerging from a community of scientists—a “race to make the laser.” 
But in that version of the laser story, the specifics of how the first laser actually 
emerged become somewhat anecdotal, as though the laser was bound to hap-
pen. That invites a question: How significant is it that the first laser was built 
out from readily accessible parts, seemingly as a scientist’s side project?

Most  of  the  innovation  stories  that  inspire  us  share  one  fundamental 
characteristic: What makes them exciting is that we already know the end. 
They make it easy to imagine the first steps: “get an idea” and “assemble a 
team.” Those are steep first steps. I contend, though, that the very notion 

10 

CHAPTER 1

that at the beginning you can even identify an innovation is specious at best. 
That’s why I have come to appreciate that the seemingly anecdotal story of 
how the laser actually emerged is so significant.3

As you embark on innovating, the choice of which version of the laser 
story to draw from for inspiration should be your own. Both versions derive 
their meaning from the same laser. You may start by putting together a few 
parts to make sense of a problem that is apparent to the members of your 
community and perhaps to no one else, at least yet. Or you may try to iden-
tify the innovation that is bound to happen. I find the hindsight version of the 
story  stressful,  nearly  paralyzing;  it  seems  to  imply  that  the  kickoff  is  an 
earth-shattering idea, one you get with virtually nothing to go on but your 
imagination. Powerful as your imagination is, though, it does not hurt to aid 
it by giving your hands something else to do besides holding your chin. I 
prefer to draw inspiration from the story that looks forward, in which being 
wrong is as natural as getting things right.

The forward-looking story of the laser suggests a strategy for innovating 
that requires only moderate foresight—a hunch—and gives you something 
to do right away: Just put some parts together. With the wealth of resources 
available  online  today,  two-day  shipping,  the  availability  of  MakerSpaces, 
and  the  increasing  access  to  moderate  amounts  of  seed  funding,  that  
approach is more achievable today than it was in Dr. Maiman’s day.

Imagine yourself in the 1960s. You and some friends are sitting around dis-
cussing whether it could ever be possible for a group of civilians to stop the 
world’s most powerful government from testing the world’s most powerful 
weapon of war. A few years later, that is how Greenpeace will be born, after 
challenging—with a fishing boat—the US government’s plans to test nuclear 
weapons.

In the years following 1969, more than thirty people came together in 
various forms for some time, driven by a desire to make a difference about the 
environment. They converged at different times in several groups driven by 

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

11

What makes most  

inspiring is that we  

already know the end.

of the innovation stories  

ecological  consciousness:  the  Sci-
entific Pollution and Environmen-
tal Control Society (SPEC) in Van-
couver,  British  Columbia;  the 
Ecology Action Group in Berkeley, 
California; the “Green Panthers” in 
Vancouver; the Don’t Make a Wave 
Committee in Vancouver; and the 
Sierra Club in Vancouver and California. This loosely bound collective was 
trying to figure out what to do to bring ecology and the environment to the 
forefront of society, creatively, through action.

At  first,  participants  borrowed  from  the  playbook  of  other  ecology 
groups in California and Vancouver. They staged creative protests, wrote col-
umns in the press, and put up billboards in Vancouver, guided by the thought 
“If you can promote companies and products, you can promote ideas.”4 The 
group even bought an old boat for ecology actions. It eventually sank.

In the summer of 1969, the US government announced a plan to conduct 
nuclear bomb tests on Amchitka, a volcanic island in the Aleutians off south-
west Alaska. This announcement gave several participants a definite pur-
pose. The group, led at different times by Bob and Zoe Hunter, Irving and 
Dorothy Stowe, and Ben and Dorothy Metcalfe, set off to stop a nuclear test 
scheduled for the autumn of 1971. It would be the second such test.

In 1971, members of the group chartered a small fishing boat and set sail 
for Amchitka from Vancouver. Proceeds from a concert helped fund the trip, 
and  several  established  ecology  organizations  supported  the  trip  in  other 
ways. During the trip, those on the boat communicated with group members 
who  stayed  behind  via  a  radio  at  one  member’s  home.  The  stay-at-home 
members  served  as  a  media  link.  Two  weeks  after  departing,  well  before 
reaching the blast zone, the boat was intercepted by the US Coast Guard. A 
month later, the test went off as planned. They failed to stop it; they never 
even made it to the Amchitka blast zone. 

The  failed  journey,  though,  garnered  an  unexpected  amount  of  news 

coverage and support from society and politicians.

12 

CHAPTER 1

That adventure began with a hunch about a social problem, billboards, 
membership  in  environmental  organizations,  protests,  op-ed  columns,  a 
concert, a fishing boat, a trip to Amchitka, a radio, and a link to the media. 
It succeeded in bringing ecology and the environment to the forefront. The 
trip to Amchitka brought together these “parts” in a new way and persuaded 
several of the participants that there was a sustainable path forward for an 
organization concerned with a new way of engaging with ecology. Months 
after the failed journey, they renamed the Don’t Make a Wave Committee 
the Greenpeace Foundation.

Just as with Maiman’s laser, nothing in that first trip to Amchitka was 
new. The combination of mostly old parts yielded something many recog-
nized as new and impactful. It was, in a way, a fully working innovation pro-
totype. It demonstrated a new way of engaging in ecology through action, it 
resonated with a much broader community, and it emerged from an embryo 
of  an  organization—a  collage  of  organizations,  actually—concerned  with 
both the trip and the diffusion of its meaning. But it was also, in a way, just 
the latest and most widely successful action of an evolving group of people 
engaged in what might be described as a sequence of trial and error to find a 
sustainable way to equate ecology and action. They returned absolutely con-
vinced they had failed. They were wrong about their impact. The unexpected 
response to their actions showed that it was not necessary to stop the US 
government to make a difference. It could have stopped at that, except 
several members of the group were persuaded that the trip to Amchitka was, 
in fact, a scalable recipe for ecology in action.

Their next iteration did not affect the recipe for the trip. Rather, the ex-
perience they accrued from participating in several ecology groups and the 
trip to Amchitka informed a new organization—the Greenpeace Founda-
tion. Its founding, however, did not put an end to learning through trial and 
error. A year after the first trip, the Greenpeace III sailed toward the Muru-
roa Atoll to stop French atomic tests. This first action of the Greenpeace 
Foundation was, fundamentally, a repeat of the trip to Amchitka. The founders 
of Greenpeace reminisced in a 1996 interview5 that the problems surround-
ing the trip of the Greenpeace III taught their nascent organization a lot 

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

13

about the legal implications of this new form of ecology action, its interna-
tional ramifications, and how to recruit new activists. In essence, they were 
learning how to bring the new thing called Greenpeace to “scale.”

Only  in  hindsight  does  it  seem  as  if  the  founders  of  Greenpeace  had 
come across one of those earth-shattering ideas. Looking forward from the 
beginning,  though,  it  seems  their  clarity  about  their  group’s  purpose—
“ecology through action”—was not a given; rather, it emerged progressively 
through trial and error, from actions before and after the founding of the 
organization Greenpeace. In fact, the specific problem Greenpeace describes 
as its mission has evolved continuously over the years. And several of the or-
ganizations that shared a similar goal around the time of the founding of 
Greenpeace—and at times also shared the same people—never scaled up the 
way Greenpeace did.

The laser is generally framed as a technological innovation that first had a 
profound impact in research. Greenpeace’s ecology in action is framed as a 
social  innovation.  Their  outcomes  certainly  are  technological  and  social. 
Their beginnings imply there may be something more general about how 
innovations emerge. We can pretend-play to time travel, but again we can see 
the laser and Greenpeace as innovations only in hindsight. Their stories pro-
vide little in the way of specific lessons about how to innovate successfully. 
The only things we can say for sure about what they teach is that you need a 
hunch about a solution to a problem, some parts and some people, and, ulti-
mately, a willingness to be wrong as you try to accomplish something. The 
“be wrong” part is the way to discover which parts to keep, which to discard, 
and which to acquire that you don’t yet have, along with which people you 
need and which people you don’t as you evolve your hunch. 

Getting  started  innovating  may  require  abandoning  some  preconcep-
tions about how you think about innovations once they reach society or the 
market and instead thinking of innovating as something you start to do way 
before the idea of a product or an organization eventually reveals itself. With 

14 

CHAPTER 1

that in mind, let me tell you another brief story, again from its beginning—
in November 2007.

It is November of 2007. A graduate student in computer science posts a 
video on YouTube in which he explains how to modify the remote control of 
a video console using an infrared sensor so that it can detect the position of 
the user’s fingers. The remote is held in place by a deck of cards. The video 
refers to a website where he makes the code  available for free. On the same 
website, he also shares instructions on how to use the remote control of the 
console to develop an interactive whiteboard and track the user’s head to 
develop virtual reality simulations. This is a side project, a “distraction” from 
the student’s thesis work. There are parts, and there is a virtual community—
the YouTube audience. YouTube was then about two years old.

Think of innovating as something you start to do 

way before the idea of a product or an organization 

eventually reveals itself.

Now here is the hindsight version of the story. In 2011, Google hired a 
computer scientist by the name of Johnny Chung Lee who specialized in hu-
man–computer interaction and was best known for his work to extend the 
functionality  of  the  remote  controller  for  the  Nintendo  Wii  video-game 
console. He’s the same computer scientist mentioned in the preceding para-
graph.  In  between  posting  the  video  and  his  employment  at  Google,  he 
worked at Microsoft, joining as a core team member of the project that came 
to be known as Kinect. You can get the full “story,” backwards, at any number 
of websites.

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

15

In the years since Johnny Chung Lee’s innovation, the Kinect has come 
to be used in personal fitness, video games for dancing, and a number of 
other action-based video games. Video games and fitness, once not even re-
motely connected, are today intertwined. That, though, is something you 
can only know after the fact. Still, it doesn’t stop people from pointing to the 
Kinect story as an example of a “truism” about innovation: focus on the user. 
Of course, it’s a lot easier to do that when you have a clear image of the end 
product than when you are making an early YouTube video. In the former 
case, the user is obvious; in the latter, the user is fictional—at best, another 
enthusiast. But that didn’t prevent Johnny Chung Lee from diffusing his in-
novation and being recruited into a Microsoft team.

The Forward-Looking Perspective

If  you  truly  adopt  the  forward-looking  perspective,  certain  things  that 
might otherwise seem easy to do reveal themselves as quite cumbersome. 
For instance, “focus on the user” is a rather abstract instruction. Finding 
users implies they exist. Calling them “users” implies they are using 
something,  which  obviously  can’t  be  your  product  if  you’re  at  the 
beginning of the innovating process. Your users don’t exist.

The paradox of focusing on or finding the user at the beginning of the 
innovating  process  is  that  while  someone  may  eventually  use  or  benefit 
from what you have to offer, there is no way you can design a yet-to-exist 
product around non-existing people. To do that, you must have set or 
fixed some users and some kind of product. The level of certainty around 
products and users required to undo the paradox and allow you to engage 
in genuine user-centered design is fairly high. Before engaging in such 
design is even possible, you have two choices. You can arbitrarily restrict 
your attention to an imagined product or you can engage in a significant 
process  of  discovery  that  will  reveal  the  offering  and  the  beneficiaries, 
along with many other things. I advocate the latter.

Before you have real, not imagined users, your innovation will look like 

a bunch of old parts strung together. If you’re like me, that’s a relief.

16 

CHAPTER 1

The Kinect story teaches the same lesson as the laser and Greenpeace 
stories: you need some parts, some people, and a willingness to keep trying or 
“tinkering” while you learn from being wrong. Depending on when you stop 
the reel, the innovation is a Nintendo Wii “hack” in a YouTube video, and 
the outcome is a series of TED talks and employment at Microsoft, or the 
innovation is the Microsoft Kinect, the team is the group Johnny Chung Lee 
joined inside Microsoft, and the outcome is myriad new opportunities for 
video games.

That’s enough time travel.

I have walked you through three examples involving technology, social pur-
pose, and a product to persuade you that the beginnings of an innovation are a 
mismatch for the stories of the organizations and innovations they ultimately 
empower. All three stories have beginnings that seem to have more in common 
with stories of failed attempts at doing something than with the companies 
and organizations that grew out of them. In fact, had I concealed the details of 
the eventual innovations any more than I did by playing time travel, you may 
have thought this book was little more than a historical compendium of peo-
ple engaged in a kind of hacking for no apparent reason. That’s the beauty of 
innovation: At first every project looks like every other project, no magic or 
foresight is required at the start, all are welcome, and then the final result  
bestows recognition as an “expert” and makes the story inspiring.

The stories teach that the path to impact—whether the outcome of your 
innovating  is  a  product,  a  technology,  or  a  new  kind  of  organization— 
appears to be fraught with near misses  and learning. But at the outset, no 
thing is new. There isn’t yet a product or even a concept of one, the minimum 
viable “product” is “do nothing,” any notion of a team is at best fluid and at 
worst just a loosely bound collective, users are fictional characters, the organi-
zation has yet to be determined, and the idea is not yet earth-shattering. 

That’s good news. It means that right now you have everything you need to 

get started, and probably more. 

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

17

It also means that you need an approach to learn as you go until the prod-
uct, the organization, and the problem you solve have become clear enough 
and serving your solution at the right scale has become your main worry.

The reason all this matters is that if you accept overturning some of the 
conventional wisdom about innovations, as I’ve tried to do, you can begin 
innovating without worrying about all the considerations that matter only in 
hindsight.

Learning

A “minimum viable product” is also a highly abstract concept. Viability is 
judged at the receiving end. A product is a highly elaborate construct. 
And  let’s  admit  it:  what  is  minimally  viable  depends  largely  on  your 
audience’s tolerance for lack of quality.

A  more  helpful  forward-looking  perspective  is  that  no  matter  how 
your first offering or prototype looks, absent room for improvement there 
is nothing left to learn. The outcome of each iteration is the next reduction 
to practice of your idea. As you work your way through iterations and 
uncertainty,  each  successive  prototype  gets  you  closer  to  being  able  to 
apply principles from management and design. Sacrificing quality to get 
something out sooner is not a principle you should adopt. Learning to 
increase quality with each iteration is.

On top of that, the moment your product requires capital expenditures, 
what had at first appeared to be minimally viable may actually require as 
much investment of labor and capital as the next higher-quality alternative.

Right around the time I introduce these ideas, my audiences begin to 
push back hard and start asking me to define what I mean by innovation. I 
suspect most readers would do the same. The most adversarial members of 
my  audiences  insist  “That’s  not  an  innovation,  because  not  everything  is 
new.” Others want to know how much “new” is needed in order for some-
thing to be an innovation.

18 

CHAPTER 1

I actually think defining innovation is a distraction from innovating. But 
I typically give in and offer a simple relation as a definition, which should 
suffice for our purposes here.
innovation: novelty with impact 

But this is the “definition” of what you end up with. You evolve toward 
it; it is not a given, and for that matter it is also a rather bad indicator with 
which to measure progress. At some point down the road, you’ll bring some-
thing new to a community and its members will benefit from it. Their benefit 
will be your impact.

It is the final result that turns someone into an 

“expert” and makes the story inspiring.

I  have  intentionally  left  out  of  this  relation  both  technology  and  the  
market—or technology push and market pull—two of the usual contenders 
for innovation. Depending on the scope of your innovation, they may become 
really  important.  At  the  beginning,  though,  they  just  get  in  the  way.  You 
choose the technology that will empower the novelty, the impact, or the inter-
action between them; you choose the market in much the same way. The 
magnitude of your impact is a measure that depends on the community you 
intend to serve and the scale at which you bring the benefits of your innovat-
ing. All these are, as a matter of fact, consequences of the choices—both con-
scious  and  unconscious—you  make  as  you  continue  learning  how  to  turn 
your hunch into a solution to the real-world problem that gives you purpose. 
If you set or fix any of market, technology, product, or impact early on, with 
nothing to go on but a hunch, the nature of the task at hand will change: 
you’ll soon find yourself unburying the assumptions you unknowingly made.

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

19

 The path to impact 
appears to be fraught 

with near misses and 

Let me give you a few quick ex-
amples to illustrate my point about 
technology, markets, scale, and im-
pact as choices.

learning.

The  first  example  concerns 
Henry Ford, who early in the twen-
tieth  century  helped  lift  much  of 
rural America out of poverty with 
his affordable car. His innovation required conceiving a new way to assemble 
cars—the assembly line—and new approaches to empowering buyers so they 
could obtain those cars, including financing their purchase and raising his 
worker’s wages. At the outset, however, Ford likely concerned himself with a 
more specific problem: the relative isolation of rural life and the time it took 
to go to the nearest town for supplies, which he knew from his own experi-
ence growing up on a farm. That problem would have already been solved by 
cars, which already existed, had they been affordable. It is unlikely Ford set 
out to invent the assembly line, introduce auto financing, or raise wages. 
Rather, those were consequences of the choices he made.

Henry Ford’s “Hunch”

Early in the twentieth century, Henry Ford’s venture lifted rural America 
in ways we would like to reproduce today worldwide. His feat is often 
associated with technology and the assembly line and with innovation in 
management  and  financing,  and  arguably  less  often  with  its  profound 
social impact. But at the time, cars were not new, raising wages five-fold 
was against the conventional business wisdom of the time (as it is today), 
and the technology Ford developed was really an instrument to scale up 
an  idea:  an  affordable  car  to  empower  rural  America.  By  making  cars 
affordable to workers and farmers in small communities, and by financing 
their purchase, Ford did as much to change society as he did to change the 
future  of  manufacturing.  Ford’s  story  of  social  change  has  unexplored 

20 

CHAPTER 1

parallelisms with Grameen Bank’s empowerment of the poor at the turn 
of the 21st century through microloans.

But Ford’s story really begins when he was a self-taught employee of 
the Edison Illuminating Company and built a quadricycle (a “hacked” 
car)  in  his  shed  to  persuade  himself  first  that  the  affordable  car  he 
envisioned could be built. His finished quadricycle did not fit through 
the  shed’s  door,  so  Ford  had  to  smash  the  doorframe,  and  then  the 
quadricycle  came  to  a  complete  halt  a  few  blocks  down  the  road. 
Consistent with the trial-and-error nature of innovating, several iterations 
later the Ford Model A (1903–04) reportedly suffered from overheating 
and slipping transmission bands. Eventually, Ford got to Model T.

At the beginning, all Ford had to go on was a “hunch” that if cars were 
more broadly available, the problems he had experienced growing up on a 
farm would disappear.* 

 * For a historical account of the many iterations in organization, management, and car models 
Ford went through to refine his hunch, see the episode of the PBS television series American 
Experience  titled  “American  Experience:  Henry  Ford”  (available  at  http://video.pbs.org/
video/2329934360).

Next up is Greenpeace, not usually thought of as a technology organiza-
tion. However, as Greenpeace learned how to organize to serve its environ-
mental purpose, those involved made use of several technologies that had 
recently become available for such use, such as long-distance radio commu-
nication between a ship and someone’s home.

Finally, there’s the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), a technology de-
veloped in the 1980s. It was instrumental in the rebirth of genetics as a field 
at the crossroads of biology and information. In the 20 years after its discov-
ery, the impact of PCR materialized as a Nobel Prize, new instrumentation, 
and the Human Genome Project. Each was a consequence of decisions made 
by certain individuals. Whether PCR was itself an innovation and when it 
became so seems subjective.

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

21

When Did It Become an “Innovation”?

The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) is a technology invented in the 
early 1980s. Today, with the benefit of hindsight, you might describe PCR 
as a reasonably simple process for amplifying a genetic signal—but you 
can do that only because we now know what to use it for. In fact, that 
description identifies genetics as an information science, something it was 
not considered to be when PCR first appeared. In its early days, PCR was 
described only as a way to massively duplicate molecules of DNA.

PCR led to a paper, a patent, the sale of a patent, and a Nobel Prize, 
and to the development and commercialization of new instruments (e.g., 
thermal  cycling  machines,  openPCR,  and  PCR  chips).  It  enabled  the 
modern field of genetics and the Human Genome Project, Ultimately, 
PCR’s very existence as a tool spawned new research directions, created a 
need  to  develop  new  educational  curricula,  and  made  it  increasingly 
possible  to  conceive  of  genetics  as  an  information  science.  All  these 
outcomes  combined  technology  and  management  considerations  to 
different degrees.

So when did PCR become an innovation? That is a question I ask in 
my lectures to make a very straightforward point, one often overlooked. 
In hindsight, it is customary to conflate the moment of invention with 
the  moment  something  “became  an  innovation”—as  if  it  had  been  an 
innovation all along. But when I ask the question about PCR, there is 
disagreement in the audience about which event “turned” PCR into an 
innovation. To some it was the paper, to some the Nobel Prize, to some 
the development of a commercial use, and to others the emergence of the 
thermal cycling machine a product.

PCR  demonstrates  that  innovation  seems  to  be  in  the  eye  of  the 
beholder.  What  you  do  next  with  your  hunch  depends  largely  on  the 
community you choose—which, incidentally, means that the vehicle to 
scale up your hunch into an innovation is also a choice.

22 

CHAPTER 1

In a 1984 interview, Steve Wozniak, a founder of Apple, reminisced:
Those of us involved with micros back in 1974, 1975—we had not already 
designed all … that goes into the mini computers of the day or the largest 
systems. To us, it was so exciting because … we thought we were doing it for 
the first time it had ever been done. All it was, it was the first time they had 
ever been done that cheap ... showing off a little card that would play music 
on a computer or make color … we thought we were way ahead of the rest of 
the world. … I was not even thinking about what are the right steps to take to 
have a very large successful company or a large successful product. … I had 
been working my whole life to build a certain type of computer for myself, 
and I just built the best one that was doable in that day with the particular 
components available.6

Indeed, Wozniak first shared the computer schematics for the Apple I in a 
small interest community known as “the homebrew computer club”—for free.
The stories I have shared with you thus far span innovation across tech-
nology, market, management, organization, social purpose, and product. Their 
end points have in common only that they all had lasting effects on society. 
Their beginnings seem to share that someone had a hunch about a problem. 
The hunches are specific, but the problems “ecology with action,” “uses of the 
laser,” “user interface like in the movie Minority Report,” and “affordable cars” 
would allow for many solutions. As Dr. Maiman put it for the laser, at some 
point all of those hunches look like “ideas seeking a problem,” not yet like in-
novations. What seems to turn these into innovations is the focus on the par-
ticular hunch and the determination to see the problem through. The sense of 
a larger opportunity in the making seems to emerge as decisions are made and 
reversed. The honorary recognition as an innovation arrives much later. At the 
beginning, only the hunch contains some essence of novelty.

It is easy to get caught up with the final result we imagine—the innovation—
and believe it ought to be recognizable as such during the process. I call it the 
curse  of  innovation  because  it  distracts  you  from  everything  you  need  to 

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

23

learn to drive your hunch to become a solution to a problem—it distracts 
you from innovating. Instead, it urges you to rush to productize your fragile 
hunch when, in fact, what you might need to do is accept that while your 
hunch may be correct, your first idea of how to materialize it is most likely 
wrong—just as you want it to be.

The world looks tremendously different from the perspective of a finished 
project than from the perspective of a budding project. There are multiple 
paths to getting to impact, and multiple forms of impact. None are known 
until your turn comes to write the story of your innovation in hindsight. 

The examples I have shared—Laser, Greenpeace, Ford’s assembly line, 
PCR, Kinect—help make my points about innovation. Even when the out-
come is well known, selecting the technology and predicting its readiness 
both seem quite difficult. The Ford example teaches that innovating is about 
far more than technology selection and management. Absent background 
information on what happened, predicting the outcome from the input is 
quite  difficult,  as  the  Laser,  Greenpeace,  and  Kinect  stories  suggest.  The 
PCR example shows that recognizing something as an innovation truly is in 
the eye of the beholder. More than that, it’s generally a revisionist exercise: 
Again, we can only define an innovation after the fact.

The PCR example also shows that the vehicle to impact is a choice. That 
choice further implies the choice of a community. For Apple, it was a startup. 
For the laser, it was first academia and then it evolved rapidly into a startup. 
PCR first became a patent sale. Ford and Greenpeace—one of which be-
came a successful for-profit company, and the other a non-profit organiza-
tion—both began by tackling a social problem. The hacked Wii led to em-
ployment at Microsoft and to the Kinect.

None of these examples suggests a linear process in which changes at the 
outset can easily be traced all the way to the outcome, much as you expect a 
car to accelerate mildly after a gentle push on the gas pedal. We humans seem 
to  strive  to  find  linearity  even  when  there  is  none.  That’s  why  stories  in 

24 

CHAPTER 1

hindsight that paint a linear path are so soothing—no matter their seem-
ingly magical changes of direction.

Innovating, by contrast, is a highly nonlinear process. Apparently tiny 
changes to the input can translate into wildly different outcomes, suggesting 
to an outside observer that you somehow effected a magical change of direc-
tion. And yet that’s precisely what we aim for when innovating: presenting 
society with a seemingly small change that will change the community that 
receives it in a profound and lasting way.

Your  surroundings  are  full  of  other  examples  of  nonlinear  processes. 
They  all  feel  somewhat  counterintuitive.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  your 
next gentle push on your car’s gas pedal returns a loud roar from the engine 
and sends the tachometer toward the red line. Having expected a linear re-
sponse, you would likely think it is time to take the car to a mechanic.

In the case of innovating, there are some noticeable advantages to this 
nonlinearity. Early on, with only small changes to what you are building, you 
can explore wildly different kinds of impact. Conversely, forms of impact 
that look similar at the outset may in turn be enabled by very different solu-
tions. That is, early trials can reveal a lot of information about the problem 
you set out to solve.

But if you are hoping for a straight path to impact, innovating may ap-
pear daunting at first. You need a lot of information to trace changes at the 
outcome all the way back to the beginnings. That’s why the stories of innova-
tions in hindsight reveal so little of what one needs to do. And forecasting an 
outcome, or a product, or a user, or an organization, or a business model, or 

None of the multiple paths to impact are known 

until your turn comes to write the story of your 

innovation in hindsight.

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

25

the specific technology needed from the hunch that characterizes the genesis 
of an innovation requires obtaining an insurmountable amount of knowl-
edge of the dynamics ahead.

At the beginning, all you have is uncertainty. You do not yet know what, 
if anything, has to be true. And that uncertainty—whether it’s conscious or 
not—is probably why you are embarking on this adventure. What you must 
do is discover what has to be true about every aspect of the problem sur-
rounding  your  hunch.  All  this  invites  a  question:  If  things  are  bound  to 
change so much, how much of what you do next should be based on the 
endpoint you currently imagine? My short answer is “Nothing.” Otherwise, 
you will face one paradox after another and you’ll end up overworking.

Paradoxes

At  the  beginning  of  your  journey,  several  concepts  that  will  become 
paramount as you get closer to an actual “innovation” should lead you to 
paradoxes. The literature on entrepreneurship and innovation is rich in 
insight into specific attributes that have defined success for many ventures. 
“Focus on the user,” “identify your lead users,” “your job is to create and 
capture value,” “develop a minimum viable product,” and “experiment,” to 
name a few, are shorthand we use to refer to a much richer reality. For the 
most part these statements are true, but they are too influenced by the end 
of the story to be as useful at the beginning as they might be when you get 
closer to an actual “innovation.” They are, for the most part, statements 
about desirable outcomes, and are largely things that will eventually come 
true (they describe what you will someday have), but not one of them 
informs you about what you actually need to do now to make them come 
true. And that is why you’ll end up overworking if you accept them. 

With the knowledge available at the beginning of your journey, the 
statements above should look like circular references, as in “focus on the 
people that will use your yet-to-exist product.” Even purported actions 
such  as  “pivot,”  “iterate,”  and  “select  the  best  ideas”  really  just  describe 
what happens rather than what you ought to do and what you ought to 

26 

CHAPTER 1

The same goes for “get a team and an idea.” You can buy parts, but 
“ideas”  don’t  come  “pre”-labeled  as  worth  exploring  and  people  don’t 
come “pre”-labeled as “team.”

“It’s all about management” raises the question “Managing what?”
“Focus on disruptive innovations” seems like an admonition to travel 
forward in time, discover what will disrupt, and then return to your own 
time to make the big score.

learn. They fit very naturally with the story from the hindsight perspective, 
but they offer little.

Words such as “user,” “need,” “business,” “value,” “innovation,” “team,” 
“pivot,” “iteration,” and so on acquire relevance and specific meaning for 
you only through the evolution of your idea. Their meaning may appear 
to  have  been  fully  crystallized  when  you  inspect  a  company  from  the 
endpoint,  but  that  is  an  illusion.  They  lacked  any  real  meaning  at  the 
outset. Again, those words do not describe directly what you do. Rather, 
like  in  the  stories  in  hindsight,  they  are  part  of  the  summary  of  what 
happens. To apply them, you will have to set in stone many of the attributes 
of your hunch with little evidence to go on. There is nothing inherently 
bad about that, provided you stay honest about what you set in stone and 
allow yourself to revisit those choices you made without evidence.

What you do need to innovate, however, need not be complicated. That’s 
not what nonlinearity means. Nonlinearity simply requires you to accept 
that early on, your forecasted end-point is almost certainly wrong. You need 
to expect to be wrong. When something doesn’t work, you know it. That 
knowledge is infallible. When innovating, you learn by being wrong.

Innovating as learning

The process of creating what eventually becomes an innovation is something 
you  can  learn  and  become  better  at  through  practice.  In  fact,  if  you  can 

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

27

overcome your concern at the beginning for whether an innovation actually 
results, innovating and learning can be the same thing. You learn about the 
problem you are solving as you innovate.

The kind of learning I’m encouraging you to embrace is a kind that was 
more natural to you in your childhood. You are allowed to use your intu-
ition, engage in trial and error, and be productively wrong. That’s how, in 
fact, you acquire language. Grammar comes later. As you grow older, instruc-
tion becomes more formulaic. How does this play out with innovation? A 
“formulaic innovation learner” wants to know what kind of idea he or she 
should have and wants a recipe to turn that idea into an innovation. That 
implies an idea already exists and that there’s a team to “execute on” the idea. 
The fatal flaw in such thinking may not be obvious, but it should be. It is 
that the idea must be largely fixed if the recipe is to work. The recipe for a 
chocolate cake works only if the idea is to bake a chocolate cake. Following 
that recipe will not result in lasagna. The recipe for the trip to stop the nucle-
ar test in Amchitka does not immediately lead to an organization. Indeed, 
the Golden Rule expedition tried to stop a nuclear test ten years earlier in 
much the same way—and no Greenpeace emerged.

With the illusion of innovation powered by a fixed idea and an a priori 
recipe, the discussion quickly turns to things you’re not ready to decide—
curvatures, size, whether target users need deep pockets, and so on. These are 
all important considerations in certain contexts, but the idea had better be 
right, because none of these will fundamentally challenge it. Your innovation 
is going to be a car, or some kind of chocolate cake, no matter what. But if 
you are still open to your innovation being social, industrial, system, design, 
manufacturing, regulatory, academic, educational, organizational, or tech-
nological, to name a few outcomes, then the process you follow ought to  
allow you to discover that as well.

Then there’s the obsession to be “disruptive” with an innovation. Fixing 
the idea places the burden to be disruptive on the idea itself. This constrains 
your options. Putting a thin layer of metal inside a light bulb launched the 
entire field of electronics. That led to the vacuum tube, the impact of which 
was disruptive. The initial technology was incremental.

28 

CHAPTER 1

The good news is that there’s a way around the madness. This book is 
about  what  I  call  innovation  prototyping,  an  incremental,  nonlinear,  and 
highly experimental process predicated on evolving solutions to real-world 
problems together with the means to bring them to the point where they 
have an impact. That impact might be disruptive, but what you do through 
your innovating does not have to be. What you do can be stated quite simply: 
Summon up a hunch about a problem, gather parts and a group (a “commu-
nity”) to work with the parts, and then work to have your solution scale. It all 
starts with a desire to demonstrate tangibly first to yourself and your com-
munity that the problem you are targeting can indeed be addressed.

The entire process works the same way you acquire language. You learn 
to speak by talking. You learn to innovate by innovating. You’re allowed to 
use your intuition, engage in trial and error, and be productively wrong. The 
process does not start with an idea for an innovation. It begins with some-
thing that is closer to you, something you cannot explain, something that 
needs fixing, or even a pet peeve. That is the problem that gives you purpose. 
Your job is then to make the problem tangible. You do that by questioning 
the problem continually. The parts and people you gather through that in-
quiry will refine the specific problem.

This process allows for innovating swiftly, broadly, and anywhere, even 

with limited resources.

Innovations solve problems

What you learn through innovation prototyping is to become an expert at 
the  problem  you  aim  to  solve.  You  acquire  that  expertise  by  prototyping  
every facet of the problem—yes, prototyping the problem, not the solu-
tion—all the way down to the organization that will make the problem go 
away. Innovations in this process are described in terms of the problems. An 
innovation is the result.

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

29

Trial and Error

Trial  and  error  is  not  “random  exploration.”  It  is  because  of  this 
misunderstanding that the phrase “trial and error” has come into and gone 
out of fashion a number of times, and why some people want to turn it into 
an adjective that modifies  “experimentation.” In some contexts, phrases 
from the sciences—“hypothesis testing,” “experiment,” or “validation”—
are used instead of “trial and error.” They all mean very different things.

Trial  and  error  reflects  an  extreme  appetite  for  advancing  through 
evidence.  It  begins  with  a  suspicion  that  something  might  be  possible, 
followed by an attempt to produce an “apparatus” to try out that suspicion. 
The objective is to make something work. If it does, you are done, though 
you might want to spend some time understanding what made it work so 
you can make it better. If it doesn’t work, that is, there is an error, your job 
is to trace back what might have gone wrong. In the course of that discovery 
process  you  will  formulate  several  hypotheses  about  why  things  failed. 
Together, these hypotheses will inform the next trial. You learn how to 
make your “apparatus” work reliably and consistently. The apparatus can 
be an artifact or an organization.

The kind of evidence one seeks through trial and error is broader than 
what can be encapsulated in a single hypothesis. The objective is to make 
numerous pieces work together in an intended way or to discover a new 
intention, unlike what you seek through hypothesis testing. The purpose 
of  verifying  a  hypothesis  is  to  acquire  one  bit  of  knowledge  about  an 
underlying theory. The tools we have for verifying hypotheses require that 
you develop and refute multiple counterfactuals before a single hypothesis 
can be verified.

The differences lie in the objective, in the amount of information, and 
in the subject of your inquiry. Hypothesis testing is an instrument to prove 
generality  one  bit  at  a  time;  the  subject  of  your  inquiry  is  a  theory—
knowledge. Trial and error is a means to make something work reliably by 
building an entire apparatus and letting your intuition guide the discovery 
process; the subject of your inquiry is what you want to build—something 
tangible.

You need only to make your innovation work. You do not need to prove 

the generality of the principles underlying your innovation.

30 

CHAPTER 1

Chapter 2 is about the problem at the center of your innovating. You can 
work with real-world problems at table scale, which allows for quick failure 
and broader trial and error. You can query and refine a real-world problem 
quickly and iteratively at that scale, using a set of parts to probe nature and 
inquiry to probe society. Your innovation prototype accumulates all prior 
knowledge about the problem to be solved, the “artifact” (whatever is created 
to  solve  the  problem),  the  impact,  and  the  vehicle  necessary  to  bring  the  
innovation to life. The innovation prototype is also a model of the uncer-
tainties that remain. Along the way, you can acquire new skills, new team 
members, and new knowledge. You can learn how to scale up a solution, 
verify a solution, give a tangible demonstration of the problem, and develop 
an organization to meet the actual scale of the real-world problem.

Every example in this chapter shows innovating at work. It is how I’ve 
trained people at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, across all disci-
plines, to innovate from the first moment they walk into class. Each of the 
innovators discussed in this chapter’s examples had a hunch about a problem. 
That was their intuition, and it seeded their work. They operated with the 
problem at the appropriate scale to enable trial and error. They made their 
problems tangible through interaction with mostly existing parts and with a 
community.  They  learned  to  be  productively  wrong.  Ultimately,  each  of 
their innovation prototypes evolved into a vehicle to scale up the solution to 
its community. Not one of the innovators was a subject expert on the even-
tual innovation. They were considered experts only after the fact. That  
potentially describes you.

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

31

Takeaways

The examples in this chapter illustrate five important observations about the 
path ahead for your hunch for an innovation:
•  Your hunch about a problem can lead to many innovations. 
At the beginning, there is an abundance of paths forward and potential out-
comes. This book has no answer at the end. The “best” path is undefined 
(e.g., Ford, laser, Kinect, PCR).
•  No one thing is responsible for the whole. 
It is unclear which technology, part, or aspect of the organization was 
pivotal to an innovation’s success (e.g., Greenpeace, PCR).
•  The path to an innovation is full of choices, not formulas. 
The technology, the market, the organizational vehicle by which the in-
novation  reaches  its  community,  and  the  form  and  magnitude  of  your  
impact are consequences of choices you need to make (e.g., PCR).

•  Innovating, like learning, is a highly nonlinear process. 
When the time comes to explain the account of your success, you will need  
to streamline your story and make it look linear. The full story of every trial, 
error, and corner turned is boring.
•  At its beginning, no thing about the eventual innovation is new.

32 

CHAPTER 1

I’ve chosen stories that span social, technology, management, product, 
academic, and research innovation and range from startups to established 
corporations and social organizations. These stories convey that these  
observations are universal; together, the stories suggest a set of principles for 
innovating:
•  A hunch about a real-world problem seeds the process.
•  Working on the problem at scale enables experimentation through trial 
and error.
•  You  learn  about  the  problem  through  interaction  with  mostly  existing 
parts and with a community.
•  Ultimately, the innovation prototype evolves into a vehicle to scale up the 
solution to its community.
•  You do not need to be an expert at the problem yet. You become one as you 
learn.

There is a three-part checklist to get started innovating:

  1. A hunch about a real-world problem.
  2. A set of parts and access to a community of people to render the  
  problem tangible.
  3. A strategy to engage in trial and error, and an appetite to learn by  
  being wrong first.

You learn about the problem as you bring together people and parts.

 

BEING PRODUCTIVELY WRONG 

33

     2
2

prototyping a 

real-world problem     

Everything you consider an innovation came to your attention because it had 
an impact. Specifically, it solved a real-world problem.

At first, postulating a real-world problem may seem as formidable a task 
as coming up with an earth-shattering idea. However, the problem does not 
have to be big; it just has to be real. Indeed, the examples in chapter 1 suggest 
that all you need is a hunch about a problem. You’ll refine the problem as you 
innovate. You’ll innovate as you solve the problem. The subtlety lies in ap-
preciating that there is a pattern to how we think of real-world problems that 
have been solved and making it routine—practicing—to give your hunch the 
same structure.

By the end of this chapter you should be able to persuade yourself that a 
hunch about a problem—not yet a full-blown problem—is the most uncom-
plicated starting point for an innovation. You can start there repeatedly with-
out fear of being wrong. In fact, there is a fairly unassuming way to build a 
purpose from a hunch that will lead you to an increasingly well-defined problem.

A hunch about a problem is a realization that there’s something that’s not 
quite right and that you suspect you can change. The founders of Green-
peace seem to have been driven by their perception that “the planet was in 
danger”1 and that society needed to be made aware of that through action. 
Your hunch may emerge from something in your daily life, from something 
in  your  work  environment,  from  recurring  conversations  within  your 
community, from something you wish were true, or from a particular prob-
lem you experience that you suspect could go away if something else existed—
possibly something you can’t quite formulate yet. 

Hunches

There is nothing particularly enlightening about a hunch. In most cases, a 
hunch is just a figment of an idea that comes to you from conversations in 
your community or from something you see in your surroundings.

Students routinely come to class with a “great idea” to do something 
“new.” Almost without exception, they claim that no one else has ever 
thought  about  their  idea.  That’s  the  first  sign  that  they  are  confusing 
novelty with unfamiliarity.

Later in the semester, they discover they were wrong; someone else had 
thought about the same thing. And because they had banked everything 
on the presumed novelty of their idea, they feel compelled to abandon it.

That’s not how a real hunch works.
As the stories in chapter 1 show, no thing is new at the genesis of an 
innovation; rather, novelty accrues as you innovate. The people who lead 
their hunches to impact developed those hunches through involvement 
in a community, an interest group, their own life or work experiences, or 
from some event or news related to a personal interest that they chose to 
act  upon.  In  a  way,  hunches  seem  to  brew  over  time  through  the 
exploration of your own interests. You may want to take that as decidedly 
good news; it means you’ve probably already brewed a few hunches of 
your own. For now, no magic is required.

38 

CHAPTER 2

That said, here are some examples of hunches from the stories in 
chapter 1, as well as some that have emerged from my research and my 
experience as an educator:

“The planet is in danger.”
“A billion people have no access to safe drinking water.”
“Gas prices keep going up.”
“We need to become energy independent.”
“Electrical energy is lost in transmission and distribution.”
“We want to make the Internet intelligent.”
“What if we could turn Science, Technology, Engineering, and  
Math (STEM) into a game and an activity for parents and kids to 
do together at home?”
“I want to build the best computer possible for myself.”
“My files are never with me when I need them.”
“We just invented a new kind of battery, so let’s do a startup for 
cellphone batteries.”

“If we could draw water from the air, we wouldn’t need 
desalination plants.”

These examples simply tell you that coming up with a hunch is easy. 
Your inquiry may begin with a fact, or even a syllogism. It need not be 
correct. It need not even be physically viable yet. That’s why you are 
allowed to be wrong.

A hunch about a problem is the most 
uncomplicated starting point for an innovation.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

39

You ought to give that hunch the same structure problems have. In fact, 
all  you  need  is  deceivingly  contained  in  the  statement  “every  innovation 
solves a problem.”

That statement may feel like a circular reference—a truism—that will 
become trivially true at the end of your process. If you work backward from 
hindsight with some of the examples from chapter 1, you may appreciate that 
the problems those innovations solved are seldom defined directly. Rather, 
they are defined indirectly: by a solution such as “the affordable car”; by how 
a solution empowers the members of a community, such as the description  
of PCR as a means to “amplify a genetic signal”; or by how an organization 
goes about verifying that it is indeed addressing the problem, such as “Green-
peace ... uses non-violent, creative confrontation to expose global environ-
mental problems, and to force the solutions which are essential to a green 
and peaceful future.”2

Coming up with an explicit problem statement is difficult, and, as these 
examples suggest, you may never need to have an explicit problem statement 

40 

CHAPTER 2

problems.

Innovations 

solve real-world 

Using these stories for guidance, here 
is how it might play out for your eventual 
innovation: An organization (new or ex-
isting) will serve the outcomes of your in-
novating sustainably. Let’s call that your 
“offering.” You’ll describe those outcomes 
as a solution that negates a problem. You’ll 
likely illustrate a form of the problem, in-
directly, by the benefits that emerge from 
adopting  your  offering.  With  guidance 
from  your  organization,  the  receiving 
community  will  infer  the  specific  instance  of  the  problem  your  offering 
solves for them; the benefits of your offering will persuade others that the 
problem is indeed solved and that your solution creates value3 for them. And 
you’ll see a rising number of players building from what you have to offer, 
some extending it, some copying it.

like those common in engineering and mathematics. Rather, your problem 
may be best illustrated by the benefits of your innovation and the organiza-
tion that makes it happen. Explicit problem statements are, as a matter of 
fact, an element of your story in hindsight. I have become convinced that it’s 
impossible to define a problem explicitly in foresight. The best we can do is 
define a problem indirectly, and that’s why I’m having you focus on a hunch.
Early on, however, before the opportunity for innovation is apparent, the 
need for specificity drives many of us to try to use various formalisms to de-
scribe a problem. A common one is “N people in place A cannot do X and 
need Y.” Say, for instance, “783 million people do not have access to clean 
water.”4 That, in a way, is a prototype of the magnitude of the impact we 
hope a solution to some unstated problem will have, but it is not a problem 
description. It isn’t even really a problem. It is, potentially, a statement of 
fact. It can be a hunch.

We can, however, define the attributes of solved real-world problems. 
Still  looking  at  the  stories  in  hindsight,  the  statement  “every  innovation 
solves a problem” and the historical examples I’ve overviewed imply three 
things about the kinds of problems innovations solve. They are:

•  solvable:  At  least  one  solution  to  the  problem  exists,  and  probably 
more.
•  recognizable: The problem, the solution, or what the solution must 
achieve can be made tangible.
•  verifiable: There is a way to decide whether a solution indeed solves 
the problem.
In logic, the word decidable describes problems of this kind. In the con-
text of innovation, you may think of it this way: Eventually, there will be an 
organization that can follow a set of steps to serve a solution to the problem 
repeatedly and sustainably; the members of the receiving community will be 
able to recognize rapidly that what the organization serves does indeed solve 
the problem. This, and specifically the third condition, can feel so obvious 
that you may overlook it altogether. 

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

41

But it is important. Certifying or verifying a solution should take signifi-
cantly less effort than it took to solve the problem; otherwise, future benefi-
ciaries would have to spend as much time as you did to figure out how what 
you produced solves their problem.

A Medieval Cell Phone

To  illustrate  this  issue  of  others  determining  whether  you’ve  solved  a 
problem of theirs, let’s do a thought experiment. Take your mobile phone 
back to the Middle Ages, along with another phone, a cell tower, and a 
generator, and show some decision makers—members of the aristocracy, 
clergy, and so on—what your phone does. Let’s say you survive: Suppose 
you are not burned at the stake in the first five minutes, and they actually 
pay attention to what you’ve shown them. Can you even fathom that they 
will  be  able  to  agree  that  your  mobile  phone  solves  a  communication 
problem?

As you prepare your argument, you might want to consider what Sir 
William  Preece,  chief  engineer  of  the  British  Post  Office,  said  about 
telephones  when  they  first  appeared  in  America,  around  1878,  quite  a 
number  of  years  after  your  most  certainly  failed  attempt  to  convince 
anyone living in the Middle Ages that the phone solves a problem:
There are conditions in America which necessitate the use of 
such  instruments  more  than  here.  Here  we  have  a  super-
abundance of messengers, errand boys and things of that kind. 
… The absence of servants has compelled America to adopt 
communications systems for domestic purposes.* 

 
 *Marion May Dilts, The Telephone in a Changing World, Longmans, Green and Co., 1941.  
For  additional  quotations  from  people  attesting  to  the  uselessness  of  the  telephone, 
see  “Imagining  the  Internet:  A  History  and  Forecast”  at  http://www.elon.edu/e-web/
predictions/150/1870.xhtml.

42 

CHAPTER 2

Giving your hunch the structure of a problem

You  may  take  these  attributes  of  solved  real-world  problems  as  principles  
to  start  working  on  your  hunch.  The  problem  that  gives  you  purpose— 
regardless of how elusive it may still be—must satisfy three simple condi-
tions. You ought to be able to:

•  imagine one or more specific solutions,
•   describe the problem or what a solution to the problem must achieve, and
•  verify when the problem is solved.

Three conditions that must be met to define a problem. The concepts illustrated are partially 
inspired by the examples given in chapter 1. The “black hole” at the center signifies that prob-
lems are seldom defined directly.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

43

The Theory of  Computation

If you are familiar with the theory of computation, you may recognize the 
notions of recognizable and decidable I use to give structure to a problem. 
I am drawing an analogy between a smoothly working organization and a 
Turing Machine—a concept invented by Alan Turing in the 1930s that 
can be adapted to simulate the logic of any computer algorithm and is 
particularly useful to reason about the execution of processes.

An idealized organization will take some input (skills, raw materials, 
knowledge,  parts,  support  query,  user  feedback,  etc.)  and  its  business 
units will perform numerous actions, following some sequence determined 
by  the  input  and  by  the  organization’s  structure.  The  sequence  will 
continue  again  and  again  until  the  idealized  organization  delivers  the 
result of its operations to a final user. That’s the end state.

The analogy goes only so far, however, because unlike Turing Machines, 
organizations—even process-based ones—have to deal with uncertainties 
and  with  a  constantly  changing  environment.  But  it  is  useful  to  think 
about the problem the organization you have to build must solve, and to 
think about the task at hand.

In a way, your task is to rephrase the problem you were given so it has 
the characteristics of the types of problems that can be sustainably solved 
by an organization following a finite number of steps, and to devise the 
organization that can successfully and reliably produce a solution. Were 
this  actual  computer  science,  your  task  would  be  to  understand  the 
structure of the problem so you could build an algorithm to address it.

In your quest, you may need to invent and innovate on many fronts so 
this becomes possible. That’s why you can start with things that are not 
new and still come up with an innovation at the end.

You  may  be  wondering  why  you  need  an  organization  at  all.  The 
problem you are solving, whatever it is, will disappear only if the solution 
is served to the community experiencing the problem. Simply sharing the 
solution with people rarely works; more often, you need to develop and 
supply the solution—and that is why you need an organization. It may be 
two people in a basement, a research lab, an educational endeavor, or a 
company  that  employs  thousands  around  the  world.  The  kind  of 
organization you develop and how long it needs to run is a choice.

 

44 

CHAPTER 2

Your first hunch will most likely address these three conditions only 
partially. As a matter of fact, hunches, at first, are either incomplete or 
wrong  about  several  aspects  of  the  problem.  Most  often  the  imagined 
solution, “the product,” is wrong—so much so that making it a purpose 
to identify the ways in which you are wrong may prove to be the most 
successful strategy. Being wrong can be detected easily because at first, 
your best guesses for the three conditions will likely contradict one an-
other. That’s what prototyping and, more generally, trial and error are 
for: to resolve those contradictions.

These  three  conditions  build  a  purpose  around  your  initial  hunch 
that has the structure of a problem like the ones successful innovations 
solve. There are advantages to focusing on something that has the struc-
ture of a problem over focusing on a technology, a product, or a startup 
idea—even when the specifics of the problem are still elusive, when the 
technological  idea  is  pure  and  you  still  believe  it  is  capable  of  solving  
every  problem,  or  when  you  are  convinced  your  imaginary  product  is 
perfect.

Working with these three conditions helps keep you honest. For in-
stance, it is more difficult to fall in love with that product you imagine if 
you  must  at  the  same  time  persuade  yourself  that  any  solution  to  the 
problem you imagine must achieve a specific set of things dictated by the 
problem, not the product. Ditto for a technology.

As you innovate, your purpose is to make the problem increasingly 
clear and specific. Focusing on the problem will also help you find a way 
to apply the same kind of mental operations we know work for problem 
solving, which you began to learn intuitively as a child and have been 
practicing ever since. Finally, these three conditions give you something 
to do right away. No matter how tenuous your hunch, each of the condi-
tions above gives you a way to strengthen it by making the problem 
tangible.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

45

Structure of a Problem

In workshops, I have used hunches to develop broad problem statements 
to get students started with innovating. Here’s an example of a hunch for 
energy independence, structured as a problem, I have used with workshop 
participants:  

How do YOU become energy independent? How will you know? 
Can you generate and distribute power reliably and locally for 
your home? How about your neighborhood? 

There is a lot of talk about the smart grid, variable sources 
of  generation,  and  the  role  that  renewables  and  alternative 
energies play in homeland security. Solving the problem of an 
entire  country  is  “easy”  with  some  policy  and  economic 
alchemy, although that’s beyond the scope of this workshop.* 
But what about your energy independence? Simple inspection 
of your electrical bill can show you that a significant portion of 
your  domestic  security  (as  measured  in  $)  goes  to  ensure 
transmission  and  distribution  of  the  energy  you  consume. 
Solving this problem at the scale of your home or neighborhood 
requires  addressing  questions  about  smart  combination  of 
variable energy sources, predictive technologies and storage. 
While this may make the problem tractable/analyzable at a lab 
scale you may also wonder: 
Can this be scaled up?  
Can you regain a country’s energy independence one  
neighborhood at a time?

Here is how the initial statement maps the three conditions.

•  It  guides  you  to  imagine  specific  solutions  in  the  electrical  space.  You 
could imagine anything from installing generation sources at your home 
to serving an entire community or from managing distribution with smart 
technologies to introducing storage. These solutions, though, begin at a 
local scale.

46 

CHAPTER 2

•  It  describes  the  problem  in  terms  of  what  a  solution  must  achieve,   
by linking energy independence to your security, as measured in dollars—
not unlike how governments link dependence on external energy sources 
with national security. However, the application is constrained to you. 
That  is,  you  describe  the  problem  and  solution  at  an  individual  or 
community level.
•  It  suggests  several ways to verify is problem is solved—for  instance,   
a measure of the recurring dollar amount spent in energy as compared to 
the rest of the budget and to the control you have over that dollar amount.
This example shows you how easy it can be to give a hunch the structure 
of a problem. Further, it stresses that these steps are not hard to execute. 
In fact, they are designed to give you just enough structure to aid your 
creative self. What makes innovating interesting isn’t how formidable an 
inquiry you set for yourself or how complex a problem you set out to 
solve,  but  rather  what  you  bring  to  the  picture—that  is,  your  critical 
thinking about the specifics.

People often believe they must somehow dress up the problem they are 
targeting  to  make  it  “inspiring.”  However,  the  more  down  to  earth  a 
problem, the easier it is to start applying your intelligence to solving it. 
Problems  have  an  inherent  complexity,  and  solutions—once  real—are 
always inspiring. Simply put, it is a waste of time to make things look or 
actually be more complicated than they really are. I find it much more 
useful and meaningful to apply my brain to unraveling the real complexity 
of the problem, not some artificial complexity I invent to impress others 
or garner attention.

  *Thanassis  Cambanis,  “American  energy  independence:  the  great  shake-up,”  Boston   
 
Globe,  May  26,  2013.  Accessed  May  9,  2015.  http://www.bostonglobe.com/ideas 
/2013/05/25/american-energy-independence-great-shake/pO9Lsad4cVQvjdpyxMI1DO 
/story.html.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

47

Making the problem tangible

You begin to understand the problem by working on it—either the solution, 
what the solution needs to achieve, or the means to verify your solution. Let 
me show you by example each of these three ways to work on your hunch.

Working on the first condition—the solution you imagine—is the most 
readily apparent option to make your problem tangible. Each of the exam-
ples in chapter 1 involved an early prototype of an imagined solution. The 
prototypes  history  has  recorded  may  not  have  been  the  very  first  ones—
many of them worked, and hardly anything works as expected the first time 
you try. But they are early enough to suggest a given about first prototypes. 
Each used readily available parts and demonstrated or enabled aspects of the 
eventual innovation. Henry Ford’s early “quadricycle,” for example, demon-
strated aspects of the affordable car and enabled Ford to move forward; he 
eventually developed the assembly line and the financing innovations that 
made the Model T affordable. Dr. Maiman likely realized how to pump light 
using  a  flash  lamp  over  an  earlier  incarnation  of  his  laser  design.  Johnny 
Chung Lee’s website of projects showed how to produce several fully work-
ing systems. In my telling of the Greenpeace story, I call the Amchitka trip an 
innovation prototype, but billboards and the boat that sank are both early 
prototypes.

If you decide to make the problem tangible by working on the solution 
you imagine, you do not need to spend time worrying about whether your 
solution is an innovation. With the examples I shared in chapter 1 as guid-
ance, you have to be ready to accept that your innovations will emerge along 
the way.

You can also work on your hunch by simulating the problem or what a 
solution must achieve. This may appear to be a distraction when you are fo-
cused solely on a product. It isn’t a distraction when the objective is to under-
stand the problem.

Problems that seem difficult to grasp may be easy to “simulate.” For in-
stance, in August 2013, several newspapers reported on Brendan O’Connor’s 

48 

CHAPTER 2

O’Connor’s purpose, as reported by different news agencies, was not to 
deploy the system for espionage. The system he built can be seen as an illustra-
tion of the obsolescence of privacy protec-
tion laws at the time. It shows the ease with 
which private citizens can spy on each oth-
er’s digital lives, and it probably also helped 
him market his services as a security consul-
tant. It is a prototype of the problem, not a 
solution.  By  making  the  digital  privacy 
problem tangible, CreepyDOL specified 
implicitly  many  of  the  things  a  solution 
would need to achieve without ever needing 
to propose one. It also provided a tangi-
ble platform for further exploration.

You innovate by 

and specific.

making the problem 

increasingly clear 

demonstration of the problem of wireless security and privacy. O’Connor—a 
security  researcher  and  a  law  student—reportedly  wondered  how  easy  it 
would be for a private citizen to monitor the movements of everyone on a 
street. At a cost of $57 per box, he put together a bunch of parts—some plastic 
cases, some credit-card-size computers, some inexpensive sensors and Wi-Fi 
adaptors—that he connected to a command-and-control system, and then 
created a way to visualize all the wireless traffic his system would pick up, in-
cluding smartphone traffic.5 He named the box CreepyDOL and built ten 
such boxes. He presented his system at several security conferences.

Finally, you can work on your hunch by assessing strategies to determine 
the problem is solved. This may seem counterintuitive at first. In truth we do it 
all the time, but think about it only after the fact: For instance, most estab-
lished businesses have quality-assurance practices; government bodies have 
certification and compliance tests and criteria. Even mathematical problems 
are phrased as “find X,” where X is generally specified via a set of conditions 
that the unknown has to satisfy; problem solvers are encouraged to find ways 
to verify their solution. These are all strategies to verify that the candidate 
product or solution meets what’s expected. When both problem and solu-
tion seem too elusive to get you started, you may still be able to begin by 

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

49

working on a “verifier.” The idea is simple: If by happenstance you were 
to stumble upon a candidate solution, how would you verify that it in-
deed solves the problem?

The  X-Prize  Foundation  model  to  develop  prizes  offers  several  ex-
amples of “verifiers.” The first X-Prize, later named the Ansari X-Prize, 
was conceived around 1995 with the vision to “make space travel safe, af-
fordable  and  accessible  to  every-
one through the creation of a per-
sonal  spaceflight  industry.”6  That 
was  the  problem  the  foundation 
wanted  solved—or,  more  specifi-
cally,  traveling  to  space  was  the 
problem.

linear process so 

expectation of a 

Abandon the 

out to solve.

learning about the 

problem you’ve set 

you can progress by 

Rather than specifying a solu-
tion or working on a solution, the 
X-Prize  Foundation  worked  on 
specifying  what  a  solution  would 
need to achieve. The aim of the X-
Prize  became  persuading  people 
that  a  private  space  industry  was 
possible  and  empowering  entrepre-
neurs  to  get  that  industry  started. 
The winning team would “build and launch a spacecraft capable of car-
rying  three  people  to  100  kilometers  above  the  earth’s  surface,  twice 
within two weeks.” In 2004, Spaceship One did just that and won the 
$10 million award.

The  statement  “build  and  launch”  is,  in  fact,  a  verifier—a  tool  to  

determine the challenge had been met.

These  examples  illustrate  general  strategies  to  make  virtually  any 
problem tangible. The examples show tangible demonstrations of prob-
lems  that  range  from  products,  to  new  industries,  academia,  policy,  
and law, to name a few. They show what I mean by prototyping innova-
tions:  rendering  your  problem  tangible  so  you  can  bring  together  the 

50 

CHAPTER 2

knowledge and skills you have and the knowledge and skills you will ac-
quire  toward  the  development  of  an  organization  that  will  ultimately 
solve the problem. You learn and innovate as you go.

Innovating and problem solving

There is a lot of work to do from the initial hunch until an organization that 
sustainably solves a problem is in place. Along the way, it is very easy to become 
enamored with intermediate steps or pose difficult questions such as “When 
should I stop ideating?” or “When should I start executing?” In other words, it 
is not uncommon to ask questions that implicitly assume there is an “answer at 
the end of the book.” Not only is that not the case, but it’s also an unproductive 
way of thinking about innovating. It is a trap. While there may seem to be some 
comfort in seeing the process of innovating as having specific, definable stages 
governed by  “progress indicators,” you benefit most when you abandon the  
expectation of linearity and liken progress to learning about the problem.

Giving your hunch the structure of a problem protects you from falling 
into the trap. It shifts your mind-set away from certain isolated aspects of 
your innovating, such as the organization, or the technology, or the product, 
or the design, or manufacturing, or its placement; it makes them all auxiliary 
elements to the problem. Nothing is “pretty” until the problem is solved, nor 
does it need to be.

The characterization of innovations in terms of the problems they solve 
makes innovating akin to a very general kind of problem solving in which 
both the problem and the solution are discovered as part of the process.

The problem that will give you purpose is unlike mathematical, scientific, 
engineering, or even market problems. Such problems generally come speci-
fied by a well-defined set of parts, or by a reasonably well-defined endpoint. 
The kinds of problems we seek to address with innovations, whether inspired 
by the market, society, or technology, are fairly sophisticated constructs that 
may at first lack any definition—everything, even the endpoint, is a choice 
you make.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

51

In  his  book How to Solve It,  first  published  in  1945,  George  Pólya 
describes problem solving formally with a list of mental operations.7 He 
introduces them as questions teachers and problem solvers may pose to 
themselves to aid progress in resolving a problem, as well as to uncover 
signs of progress when progress is not readily apparent. Pólya groups the 
questions into four phases: understand the problem, make a plan, carry 
out the plan, and look back on your work to see whether you could solve 
the problem in a better way.

Pólya was writing about mathematical problems and was extrapolat-
ing to practical problems that have a clear endpoint. But problem solving 
can be generalized to the broader problems you encounter when innovat-
ing. This structure—solvable, recognizable, and decidable—establishes 
for an innovation problem the same structure as mathematical problems. 
So, in principle, you should be able to begin making your problem clearer 
by posing to yourself the questions Pólya offers—something you’ll have 
to do at several points along the way. However, because the data, the un-
knowns,  and  the  conditions  that  define  your  problem  are  also  part  of 
what you need to solve for, you are going to need more to go on.

Pólya provides numerous recommendations of ways to overcome dif-

ficulty or lack of progress when solving a problem. For example:

•  “If you can’t solve a problem, then there is an easier problem you 
can solve: find it.
•  “If you cannot solve the proposed problem, try to solve first some 
related problem. Could you imagine a more accessible related problem?”
•  “Draw a hypothetical figure which supposes the condition of the 
problem satisfied in all its parts.”

52 

CHAPTER 2

These  three  recommendations  provide  a  good  basis  for  generalizing 
problem solving to innovating. The first thing to realize is that the prob-
lem you are proposing very likely lives at a scale far beyond your immedi-
ate resources. So, you need to find an easier or more accessible version of 
your innovation problem to solve. Put another way, you need to scale the 
problem you want to solve down to a scale at which it corresponds to the 
resources you have to understand the problem.

For a mathematical problem, a figure would help you turn something 
otherwise abstract into something tangible that helps your intellect and 
senses work together. Blueprints or models serve the same purpose for 
practical  and  engineering  problems.  For  entrepreneurship  and  innova-
tion, you might use a slide-deck. But that can help you only so much; a 
lot remains abstract. If you’ve brought your problem to a resource-friend-
ly scale, though, there are other things you can do to realize the same 
value that figures offer in solving mathematical problems. You can physi-
cally prototype any aspect of your problem, or, as Pólya puts it, you can 
build a prototype that “assumes the condition of the problem satisfied in 
all of its parts.” That, of course, might include a gizmo, but it can also 
include an organization, distribution, marketing, manufacturing, and so 
on. At that scale, you don’t have to limit yourself to prototyping form 
alone. You should strive to prototype function.

So, you can generalize problem solving to innovating if you work on 
bringing the problem first to a resource-friendly scale, and work at that 
scale to make the problem tangible, prototyping all aspects of your even-
tual solution—and, in so doing, implicitly outlining all areas in which 
innovations may be required. After that, your task will be to understand 
your problem at one scale and work toward scaling up successive demon-
strations of the problem.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

53

Scale

The objective of bringing a problem to a different scale is to enable quick 
and tangible experimentation on the aspects of the problem most critical 
to move forward. It is also helpful to begin separating the nature of the 
problem from the magnitude of the impact to which one aspires.

There are many ways to work on the scale of a problem. A common 
one is to change the size of the community—for instance, “Let’s start with 
five  people  and  then  ramp  up  to  twenty.”  But  there  are  other,  more 
effective  ways  to  bring  a  problem  to  a  scale  that  is  more  amenable  for 
quick experimentation—for instance, introducing assumptions to extract 
the most knowledge and impact from the resources at hand.

Let me give you two examples of the interplay between resources and 

scale.

In class, a group was interested in devising a system to detect infectious 
diseases quickly. To realize their initial vision, they would have needed a 
lab with biosafety level 2 or 3. The stage their hunch was at, though, did 
not justify the investment in resources and skills required to access and 
use such a facility.

They  could  have  stopped  at  that.  Instead,  they  introduced  an 
assumption of scale: a strawberry is a bacteria. The effect of this particular 
assumption of scale was (a) because of how easy it is to extract DNA from 
a strawberry, they could forgo dealing with the complexity of establishing 
what  constitutes  a  good  enough  sample  of  bacterial  DNA  for  their 
experiments; (b) they didn’t need the extra resources of a biosafety lab 
right away; and (c) getting out of the straitjacket of thinking in terms of 
the biosafety lab freed them to think about a simple device with which to 
experiment  on  the  problem.  After  that,  it  took  only  a  week  to  bring 
together the parts and knowledge they needed and come up with a plan 
for  how  to  move  forward.  They  were  able  to  articulate  their  plan  by 
building on conversations with industry experts and a demonstration of a 
small working device.

More generally, working on the scale of the problem also introduced a 
very convenient change to the sequence of proofs of concept. Once their 
device was ready, the knowledge they would need next would transcend 

54 

CHAPTER 2

their assumption of scale. At that point, they would need access to the 
specialized lab only to test for that specific knowledge, and they could 
either contract out the testing or rent the lab whenever they were ready to 
move forward.

In a different setting, during a lecture in which I challenged students to 
think about how to prototype their ideas (form and function) all in one 
day, a team complained that their idea could not be prototyped. They 
were thinking about a pill that would emit a signal when dissolved in the 
stomach and help measure patient compliance. Their main concerns were 
miniaturizing the electronics to fit in a pill, any regulatory unknowns that 
might exist, and what a safe signal strength would be.

On that occasion, the answer to the question of scale was to assume a 
much  bigger  human.  In  other  words,  miniaturizing  electronics  and 
inserting  them  in  a  pill  were  considerations  for  down  the  road—
considerations that might indeed require significant innovations. At that 
day’s stage of their thinking, though, the team needed to characterize the 
problem. Coating the necessary electronics in cereal, choosing a recipient 
of the right size to simulate a stomach proportional to the size of the pill, 
coating the simulated stomach with material that had a density similar to 
that of a human body, and then developing a number of test scenarios 
would at least give their questions the next level of specificity they would 
need  to  outline  all  the  manufacturing  steps,  regulatory  measurements, 
and  reasoning  about  the  mechanisms  by  which  they  could  actually 
measure compliance.

You can generalize problem solving to innovating: 

Bring the problem to a resource-friendly scale, make 

it tangible, and scale up successive demonstrations 

of the problem.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

55

The  final  problem  you’ll  solve  will  likely  differ  substantially  from  the 
problem you thought you were solving at first. That is because your first ex-
pression of the problem was, with high probability, ill informed if not out-
right wrong. That’s all right; the purpose of your first hunch was to get you 
started. You’ll discover how wrong as your innovation prototype evolves to-
ward scale.

Prototyping the problem at scale

With your hunch structured as a problem, your next task is to make that prob-
lem tangible at a scale that matches your available resources. You can do so by 
prototyping  a  solution,  the  problem  itself,  or  even  the  means  to  verify  the  
solution—just as was done in the examples of Ford, Greenpeace, CreepyDOL, 
and the X-Prize. Only as you make progress in your understanding of your 
problem does it become worthwhile to address it at a larger scale. That’s when 
you’ll know whether you might need additional parts, people, and resources.

Progressing from a Hunch

1.  At the start, you a have hunch.
2. You give your hunch the structure of a problem. You have to  
 
postulate what makes your hunch solvable, recognizable, and verifiable.
3.  You reformulate your problem at a smaller scale so you can start 
working on it.
4. You sketch the smaller-scale problem with a prototype of the 
problem’s form and function, much as you would draw a figure to 
aid in problem solving.
5.  You can now describe your prototype as a small-scale 
illustration of a problem.
6. You restate the problem.

56 

CHAPTER 2

Let me put this more pragmatically as a set of actions that might help you 
progress from a hunch to a full-scale realization of a solution to a real-world 
problem inspired by your hunch.

At the start, you a have hunch. You give your hunch the structure of a prob-
lem. You need to postulate what makes your hunch solvable, recognizable, and 
verifiable. The key idea is that you need to configure your endeavor in a man-
ner that allows you to probe the specifics of the problem you think you are 
solving. Doing so makes you aware of all the things you do not know just yet 
about the problem, which generally come in two flavors: things you can ad-
dress now and things you will have to address later.

There  are  things  you  don’t  know  because  you  have  never  studied  or 
learned them, but you can at least recognize. These are data or conditions 
that  will  further  define  your  problem.  You  need  to  find  out  about  them. 
Someone else might know.

Then there are things you can’t recognize or can’t yet formulate. Perhaps 
no one has ever formulated them. These are your unknowns and uncertain-
ties. You need to find the scale for your problem at which they are no longer 
an issue or can be assumed resolved. By the time you hit the scale at which 
they do matter, you’ll be able to reason about them as data or conditions 
someone else might know about. 

Problem structure is also addressed in chapter 6, where I discuss how to 
set up a problem you care about so a team can work on defining, refining, 
and ultimately solving it.

You reformulate your problem at a smaller scale so you can begin working 
on it. This action is a response to a very straightforward and all-too-common 
question innovators face: What do you do when the problem you want to 
solve is at a scale far beyond your immediate resources?

 You have options. One is to “prototype” your hunch with PowerPoint, 
investing resources you do have, including your time, to create a presentation 
as part of the quest for further resources.

An alternative is to reformulate the problem so you can begin working 
on it. Doing so establishes, for now, a good endpoint from which to work 
backward with the resources at hand. Scaling down teaches you what you 

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

57

will need to deal with—namely, those unknowns and uncertainties—as you 
scale up in the future and layer proof of concept upon proof of concept.

You can prototype a problem with just about anything that can show you 

how you are wrong—such as parts and people, covered in chapters 3 and 4.

You sketch the smaller-scale problem with a prototype of the problem’s form 
and function, much as you would draw a figure to aid in problem solving. Your 
prototype of the problem, however, will have to assume that the problem is 
solved; that is, it will have to contain all the parts you expect a solution to have. 
Your goal is to prototype both the parts and the impact. Successful prototypes 
inform, in one way or another, everything involved in making the future offer-
ing real. An innovation prototype is a bit like a dry run of your entire idea.

If at this point, if your idea of an organization is still fuzzy and you are 
uncertain about what to prototype, you need to read the problem statement 
you’ve elaborated from your initial hunch. You can prototype the solution, 
although  prototyping  a  solution  when  the  problem  is  still  elusive  can  be 
stressful. It might be easier to begin by prototyping something that answers 
questions such as “What needs to be true?” or “What am I trying to accom-
plish?” or “How will I know when to stop?”

You can prototype a simulation of the problem. You can prototype some-
thing that will allow you to verify that a candidate solution is indeed a solu-
tion. All there is to work with are parts and people. Your task at this point is 
to figure out which parts and which people to bring together.

The  parts  you  bring  together  help  you  materialize  data  and  facts  you 
think you know about the problem. Those parts may include a gizmo as well 
as aspects of the organization you think can serve a solution sustainably. Peo-
ple help you address the things you do not know (data and conditions).

At  first,  your  main  concern  is  what  to  bring  together.  The  data,  un-
knowns, and conditions take over your inquiry. The task changes as you be-
gin to worry about how to make the parts and people work together, and 
ultimately it becomes a matter of how to do so effectively, which is defined as 
you progress in the problem. I discuss this further in chapter 7.

You can now describe your prototype as a small-scale illustration of a problem. 
By  now,  you  have  made  certain  assumptions  to  make  the  initial  problem 

58 

CHAPTER 2

tractable and have discovered what else needs to be true to bring it to the 
next  scale.  The  version  of  the  prototype  you  just  completed  includes  the 
following:

•  the data you gathered
•  parts that have been “strung together”
•  a group of people (either colleagues or people you have accessed for  
information, feedback, or knowledge)
•  a rough vision of impact, possibly even a small-scale demonstration, 
and a sense of what else needs to be accomplished and the uncertainties 
that remain.
Your prototype is all those things together: the artifact you put together, 
the people you probed, the people who joined you at this stage, the people 
that already left the group, the knowledge you’ve acquired, the impact you’ve 
prototyped, the larger problem you envision, and the emerging organization 
that sustains your inquiry into the problem. Some things in the prototype 
worked; some did not. Some you omitted because you either don’t know 
how to address them yet or you lack the resources to address them now. Per-
haps you think they can only be addressed later.

You can describe the problem by pointing to the aspects of the prototype 
you will work on next to make the imagined impact a reality. Describing the 
prototype of a small-scale illustration of the problem allows you to outline all 
that’s known and the uncertainties that remain, and to rank order the re-
sources you need by how they will help you progress. And with that, you 
could now advocate to obtain those resources, whatever they might be: fund-
ing, colleagues, time, expertise, space, and so on. I discuss uncertainty further 
in chapter 9.

You restate the problem. Back to square one? Not quite. Problems evolve. 
That’s the message of the Greenpeace example. In each iteration, the prob-
lem gains resolution and you progress toward a larger-scale appreciation of 
the problem. Innovating is not the mystery it is sometimes made out to be; in 
fact, anyone can do it.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

59

Visualization of the recurrence rule to refine a problem.

60 

CHAPTER 2

Iteration

Strictly speaking, the set of actions that I propose for progressing from a 
hunch  may  be  interpreted  as  an  iteration.  The  outcome  of  one  pass 
through  all  the  steps  brings  you  back  to  the  first  step,  which  is  a  new 
beginning, but with a different understanding of the context in which 
you  are  working.  Nevertheless,  I  avoid  using  the  terms  “iteration”  or 
“iterate” because they tend to be confused in normal use.

Outside of computer science, “iterate” is often used to mean repeating 
something with the purpose of refining some answer. Other words from 
computer  science,  such  as  “variation,”  “relaxation,”  or  “approximating,” 
would be better choices to describe that process. They all, however, imply 
a sense of gradual convergence, which when absent makes it difficult to 
recognize progress or imagine the scenario that would lead one to change 
course.

When  used  in  the  non-technical  sense,  “iterating”  often  refers  to  a 
sequence of steps that end at a point different from the beginning. Also, 
within the process of iteration as the word is typically used, there is not 
usually an admonition to articulate the state of all the variables at the end 
(of  each  iteration).  So,  iterators  are  left  with  endpoints  that  resemble 
nothing  like  what  they  started  with.  Sometimes  “iterate”  is  used  even 
more  ambiguously  to  mean  that  you  restart  or  that  you  will  refine 
whatever you are working on in some unspecified way.

I see the typical approach to iteration as a kind of insanity, because 
repeating the exact same steps should lead to the same outcome. To resolve 
the conundrum, people invoke learning without defining what that is—
which makes it even harder to apply the process. So I try to avoid using 
the word ‘iterate” altogether.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

61

With your prototype in hand, with everything you have learned, and 
with everything you assumed, you should now realize why your first version 
of the problem was wrong. That’s your next hunch. You may now restate the 
large-scale problem. You’ll probably realize there isn’t one but several ver-
sions of the problem you could focus on. Pick one for now. What is a possible 
solution? What does the solution need to achieve? How would you know 
the problem is solved? That’s your next problem.

To be productively wrong, you have to make sure you can continue to 
execute. At some point, that may imply searching for additional resources. It 
is generally easier to search for those resources when a problem is tangible. 
Chapter 8 provides an overview of strategies for inquiry and advocacy with 
an innovation prototype.

The set of actions described in this “Prototyping the problem at scale” 
section will keep you busy as you bring your hunch to full scale. It is not a 
recipe, though. It is a progression of activities that ought to help you further 
refine a problem for innovation. You’ll likely go through this progression 
multiple times as you learn about the problem you are solving. Often, as you 
try to restate your problem, you’ll find yourself not with one but with mul-
tiple possible problems to pursue. That is actually an indicator of progress.

At first, the problem you solve will evolve substantially. That’s because 
while the real-world problem that inspired your hunch remains largely the 
same, you are still discovering the actual content and characteristics of that 
problem. To an outsider, it will seem as though you are continually changing 
direction. That’s mostly because what an outsider has to measure is your cur-
rent best guess of the nature of the impact, your product, the organization, 
the technology, and so on. Those, though, are what Pólya might call auxiliary 
elements of your inquiry about the problem.

As you gain clarity on the problem you are solving, the same activities 
will gradually lead to a different outcome. It will increasingly look as though 
you layer proof of concept upon proof of concept, each demonstrating a larger-
scale version of the problem and your proposed solution.

62 

CHAPTER 2

This should not come as a surprise: Numerous disciplines and industries 
have  standardized  the  processes  by  which  solutions  demonstrate  their 
readiness for scale. The progression from pre-clinical through various phases 
of clinical studies before approval of a new compound as a drug is one ex-
ample. For new chemical and biochemical processes, the progression from 
lab scale to pilot plant and to commercial plant is another example. The same 
logic may be found in several other contexts, such as the development of 
manufacturing processes, and even with software as it progresses from beta 
to alpha. The specific meaning of scale varies in each context, but the under-
lying rationale is the same: Once the solution is clear, assembling all the com-
ponents required to serve the intended population sustainably and reliably 
requires progressing through a scale-up sequence in which problem solving is 
key and there is no closed formula demonstration. The objective in these 
instances is, generally, called “de-risking.”

As you gain clarity on the problem you are solving, 

the same activities will gradually lead to a different 

outcome.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

63

Evolution of the Problem Greenpeace Solved

The problem that gives purpose to an emerging organization evolves as 
much  as  what  the  organization  does.  This  can  be  seen  by  reviewing 
statements Greenpeace has used over the years to describe its purpose.

The  progression  of  Greenpeace’s  statements  illustrates  that  the 
problem innovators solve evolves as they innovate. From the outside, it 
appears  that  organizations  and  people  pivot.  This  evolution,  however, 
may also be explained by the difficulty of matching the richness of detail 
in  the  story  the  founders  of  Greenpeace  lived  going  forward  with  the 
abundance of information about the organization and its context available 
when we retell the story in hindsight. This often translates into either a 
perception of shifts in purpose or apparent disagreements on how it got 
started. In the history pages of its website, for instance, Greenpeace itself 
notes the irony of there being multiple plausible stories that describe its 
founding.*

Here I present the statements in reverse chronological order.

Greenpeace’s mission (December 16, 2014): We defend the 
natural world and promote peace by investigating, exposing, 
and confronting environmental abuse, championing environ-
mentally responsible solutions, and advocating for the rights 
and well-being of all people.

We take action only where we and our supporters have the 
most capacity to make an impact, where people’s lives are most 
heavily affected, and where environmental risks are most dire.
The problems we are trying to tackle are so big, that it takes 
a huge effort, comprised of people all over the world. That is 
where  our  supporters  come  in.  Greenpeace  is  an  inclusive, 
people-powered,  collective  movement.  Our  focus  is  on  big 
political  and  corporate  changes,  just  as  much  as  it  is  on 
empowering people in our network to act in their homes and 
communities.
Greenpeace’s  mission  (December  1996):  Greenpeace  is  an 
independent,  campaigning  organisation  which  uses  non-
violent, creative confrontation to expose global environmental 

64 

CHAPTER 2

problems, and to force the solutions which are essential to a 
green and peaceful future.

Greenpeace’s  goal  is  to  ensure  the  ability  of  the  earth  to 
nurture life in all its diversity. Therefore Greenpeace seeks to:

Protect biodiversity in all its forms.
Prevent pollution and abuse of the earth’s ocean, land, air 
and fresh water.
End all nuclear threats.
Promote peace, global disarmament and non-violence.*
Greenpeace  founder’s  recollection  (from  1996  interview): 
We were just a handful of people from different backgrounds, 
but on one thing we agreed—this planet is in danger.
Robert Hunter’s description of the mission of the founding 
trip  to  Amchitka  (as  printed  in  Rex  Weyler’s  chronology): 
“The  United  States  will  begin  to  play  a  game  of  Russian 
roulette with a nuclear pistol pressed against the head of the 
world. … There is a distinct danger … that the tests might set in 
motion earthquakes and tidal waves which could sweep from 
one end of the Pacific to the other.”
Billboards all over Vancouver (Green Panthers): “Ecology? 
Look it up! You’re involved.”
Description of the SPEC committee, circa 1969 (Although 
SPEC  was  technically  separate  from  Greenpeace,  several 
future  members  met 
that 
organization): The preservation and development of a quality 
environment through the stimulation of public interest, and 
consultation  and  cooperation  with  industry,  government, 
labour, and academic communities.**

through  participation 

in 

 *Obtained from http://web.archive.org.

 **Frank Zelko, Make It a Green Peace! The Rise of Countercultural Environmentalism, Oxford 
University Press, 2013, p. 38.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

65

What may come as a surprise is that the process you need to follow be-
fore the problem and solution are clear follows the same scale-up logic. With 
the possible exception of highly regulated processes that require a fixed start-
ing point, the evolution from what The Innovator’s Way8 calls the “sensing” 
phase to the “execution” phase can be smoother than most of us believe at 
first. No pivots are necessary. Placing the emphasis on scale and on making 
the problem tangible makes your process smoother.

Eventually, your activity will progress from discovering the problem to  
managing  the  organization  that  solves  the  problem.  Certain  words  that 
seemed obscure at the outset—“team,” “culture,” “need,” “product/service,” 
“value,” and so on—will acquire increasingly precise meanings that are given 
by the choices you make as you progress through the earlier phases of your 
inquiry.  As  you  progress  through  the  phases,  you’ll  find  yourself  making 
more and more use of concepts from innovation management and finding 
entrepreneurial recipes you can use as routines.

Most innovations, as the Ford, Greenpeace, and even Kinect examples 
show, actually emerge while you’re working on what you think is something 
else. There’s no evidence that Henry Ford set out to create a new kind of as-
sembly line. Johnny Chung Lee set out to emulate the movie Minority Re-
port.  That’s  why  the  notions  of  market  pull  and  technology  push,  which 
paint formulaic pictures, actually conceal a richer reality in which any and 
many innovations are allowed to emerge from the process.

Learning as you go

If you are truly innovating, then what you are about to propose has not yet 
been done. Yet, as you start, you are mostly putting readily accessible parts 
together. As a matter of fact, you may not even fully understand the implica-
tions of your assembling until you see all those parts working together. This 
is one of those paralyzing paradoxes that, come to think of it, you should face 
as you engage in your inquiry. The only way out is to accept that you have 
learning to do as you go.

66 

CHAPTER 2

You are not an expert at the outset. You become an expert. It follows that, 
before you are correct about the problem, you are going to be wrong about 
it—essentially every single time. But you will be right about many smaller 
problems that you solve along the way.

As you collect all the elements of your innovating-as-problem-solving, to 
you it will probably look like this: many distinct, tangible problems besides 
the one that got you started; information obtained through conversation; 
several failed attempts; and a lot learned. The innovation may come from 
how you address some of those other problems. Henry Ford faced an inabil-
ity to produce a sufficient number of cars per hour. He met that manufactur-
ing challenge with “innovation”—the assembly line. Similarly, your innova-
tion will come from things you had to conceive to close the gap between a 
tangible problem and its solution. That one problem that matches the hunch 
that got you started really emerges from an act of synthesis.

To others, viewing innovation in hindsight, your progress will only be 
apparent when they can imagine a product or a family of products. In other 
words, by the time you’re nearly done, others will conflate your product and 
the innovation. As a good problem solver, you will revisit your problem and 
view your innovation in hindsight. Then you will be able to rationalize what 
you did into “stages” that may or may not have actually existed as you were 
going through them. You may identify phases of the work as gates and hand-
offs and even persuade yourself that there was a specific moment at which 
you pivoted from ideation to execution. Again, though, these things are only 
part of your hindsight; they don’t mean anything when you’re innovating.

At the root of this process is something with which we are fundamentally 
uncomfortable. As we grow up, having acquired expertise in a field and tast-
ed “being right” and being recognized for it, the very idea of being wrong is 
in itself traumatic. To accept being wrong as something good and useful re-
quires a change of attitude, a shift in how we think about things.

Assuming you are not so lucky as to have learned everything you need to 
know before you even develop your hunch, at best you and the people around 
you have only piecemeal expertise and skill relevant to the problem. That 
makes it all the more sensible to accept that starting with parts lying around 

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

67

can lead you to something being recognized as an “innovation.” That’s the 
aspect of innovating that resembles problem solving. Along the way, people, 
skills, and clarity all accrue until impact can be measured. Learning helps you 
gauge progress.

I am often asked whether innovation (which represents a conclusion) 
can be learned. That’s the wrong question. What matters is that innovating is 
something you can practice and become better at—if you achieve the right 
combination of knowledge and “muscle memory.” The latter is possible only 
with perseverance. It requires abandoning recipes and engaging your brain. 
That happens to be what your brain is good at. Once you learn to trust your 
brain to operate outside the realm of formulas, innovating will become  
almost second nature.

68 

CHAPTER 2

Takeaways

•  You can engage in innovating just as you would engage in problem solving. 
All you need to get started is a hunch. You can give any hunch the structure 
of a problem. Your job is to make the problem tangible.
•  What makes a problem a problem is its structure. The facts that may ulti-
mately  inform  the  impact  of  a  solution  are  just  that—facts.  What  distin-
guishes a real-world problem from a fact is recognition (What are you trying 
to accomplish and why is that a problem?), verification (How will you know 
that you are done?), and imagining a solution. Your initial solution, your veri-
fication recipe, or even your problem itself can be wrong. That means you 
can get started from anything. A hunch will do.
•  Innovations are not prescribed; they emerge from what you do in the pro-
cess of trying to understand and tame a real-world problem, in the same way 
solutions emerge in problem solving. The word “innovation” is not short-
hand for a new product. Innovations are not predictable at the outset.  
Acknowledging  that  all  you  have  is  a  hunch  may  require  accepting  that  
everything is a variable, is subject to change, and that there is nothing to solve 
for—yet. That too is up to you to discover.
•  Get ready to be wrong, and get ready to be told you are wrong even when 
you’re not. A good solution can emerge from being wrong a lot. You are not 
an expert at your problem yet; expect to get to the “right” solution through a 
long sequence of “wrong moves.”
•  You  need  only  be  approximately  right  once.  By  then,  you’d  better  have 
come up with your own way to know you’re right: That is how you know 
you’re close to the end. Otherwise, you may “innovate” past a solution.
•  There are several advantages to prototyping a problem as an approach to 
innovation:

Progress is about how much you learn about the problem.

 

PROTOTYPING A REAL-WORLD PROBLEM 

69

There are multiple strategies for making your problem tangible and 
getting to specific questions.
There is a demonstration possible of any problem at a scale that matches 
your current resources.

•  You can just get started by being wrong. This may require a shift in 
mind-set.

70 

CHAPTER 2

ii

exploring in foresight
Learning from Parts and People

it takes little effort to imagine an organization that 
serves a solution. Once you do, it is easy to divine that such an or-
ganization has some definite elements. Indeed, there is a constella-
tion of definite elements—distribution, a channel, a business mod-
el,  a  product  or  a  design,  engineering,  manufacturing,  business 
development,  regulations,  users,  advertising,  purpose,  impact, 
skills, and technologies old and new, to name some—that, with the 
help of people, you can conjure up to accomplish all you imagine. 
You imagine all this as some harmonious whole. It’s all in your head.
It gets worse. The harmony implies that all these elements are 
interconnected in ways you designed—also in your head. But the 
only thing tethering this imaginary organization to the real world 
is your own set of experiences.

Those experiences might be all you need for your imagined 
organization to make sense to you. But it is still imaginary. You 
need to make it real. When you do, you’ll discover that those ele-
ments live at the intersection of multiple disciplines, and that they 
affect one another in ways that are up to you to specify.

76 

PRELUDE

Netflix illustrates this well. There was a time when “distribu-
tion” implied a web page, your mailbox, the postal service, special 
envelopes, a logistics design, a network of DVD warehouses, rights 
to rent DVDs, and a subscription service limiting the number of 
DVDs you could have at any one time. It later implied a web page, 
a media player, a broadband connection, data centers, streaming 
rights, and an all-you-can-watch subscription plan.

So, it would seem that for Netflix the element “distribution” 
meant two very different things. Once Netflix began to produce 
its  own  content,  “distribution”  might  have  acquired  yet  a  third 
meaning. Netflix could afford to have multiple meanings because 
the problems the company solved through distribution were real.
Back  to  your  imagined  organization.  Sure  enough,  things 
eventually have to get to their intended beneficiaries. That, how-
ever, is not saying much about what makes a distribution strat -
egy successful, or even what makes it real. Now consider the con-
stellation  of  elements  I  mentioned  earlier.  Given  the  extent  to 
which each piece of that constellation depends for its definition 

 

PRELUDE 

77

on  every  other  piece,  you’ve  got  to  wonder  whether  any  of  the 
words that will at some point help you structure your organization 
even apply now. I do.

Before anything is defined, beyond divination, you’ve got to 
wonder  whether  you  have  anything  other  than  the  prospect  of 
many moving parts and people that have to work harmoniously—
in your head and outside your head—to be effective. And you have 
to consider all that implies in terms of scale. The organization you 
imagine is impactful already in your head; if it weren’t, you might 
not  even  act  on  it.  The  real  question—the  real  scale-up  chal-
lenge—is what of that magical idea has a chance to escape your 
head and positively affect other people’s lives.

The  field  of  management  has  made  it  easier  to  phrase  that 
question for business ideas. But the conundrums you face when 
making your imaginary organization real apply equally to sharing 
art, music, technology, or social causes. It is in your head, and be-
fore anyone else enjoys what’s there, it needs to get out of there, 

78 

PRELUDE

become real, and somehow reach other people. It is only natural to 
expect  that  inside  your  head  you  haven’t  thought  everything 
through in the same way the world might need you to.

Before we can even discuss the things that make management, 
large-scale  engineering,  design,  marketing,  and  so  on  useful  to 
you, you have to get what you imagine out of your head. For now, 
the least you can assume is that there are moving parts to your idea 
and that you’ll encounter other people along the way.

That’s  my  starting  point  for  what  I  mean  by  parts,  people,  
and how to interact and interface with them to attain scale and 
impact.

 

PRELUDE 

79

     3
3

interacting with parts    

Innovating need not begin with raising lots of money. You can start with 
what you already have.

By now you should have a pretty good idea of a problem, based on your 
initial hunch. From chapter 2, you know your problem might still be wrong. 
The discerning reader will likely appreciate that there are always ways to be 
wrong for less money and fewer resources. You could ask for the money to 
address the big problem, or you could bring the problem down to a scale the 
available resources permit. Doing so lets you actually begin to work on solv-
ing your problem right away. You can start with parts lying around, as in the 
examples in chapter 1.

In other words, bring resources to the problem or bring your problem to 
the resources. It’s your choice. Whether you postpone your start until you 
have all the resources you now think you need or you start right away, when 
you do get started you’ll first have to figure out how your resources are going 
to work together. That’s my starting point for the discussion here.

Resources are parts, people, funding, or knowledge. Funding comes from 
people, and knowledge may come from other people or from how you bring 

certain parts together. That leaves parts and people to discuss in this chapter 
and the next chapter.

Because a book requires some linearity, I had to choose whether to talk 
about people or about parts first. What I want to tell you about interfacing 
with people and interacting with parts are very similar, so I flipped a coin. 
Parts  won,  so  this  chapter  focuses  on  parts;  chapter  4  focuses  on  people.
I’ll go more specifically into what I mean by “parts” later in the chapter. 
For now, you may benefit from approaching parts virtuously on the basis of 
this general principle: Whatever you dismiss as not being a part is something 
you prevent yourself from potentially using. You probably don’t want to prej-
udice yourself in that way. If you think about parts in this broad manner it 
will probably aid you in the singular purpose of getting tangible as quickly as 
you possibly can.

Start innovating with whatever you have. You 

renounce whatever you dismiss as not a part. 

The fear of getting tangible

In  my  teaching,  I  have  often  encountered  a  fear  of  “getting  tangible”  too 
quickly—a fear about parts. This often translates into a belief that innovators-
in-the-making don’t really have the choice I mentioned at the beginning of 
this chapter: start by raising money or just get started. Aspiring innovators 
want to fall back on the recipe that would have them set out on a quest for 
funding with which to buy the expertise they think they need to take the next 
step. My experience and my observation of this phenomenon have convinced 
me that what they actually fear is their lack of knowledge. When that fear 
kicks in, they default to whatever will decrease their perception of uncertainty. 

82 

CHAPTER 3

The winner tends to be recipes for pitching ideas or rushing a product out  
the door.

Fear gets in the way. You really don’t need to know every single thing there 
is to know about a part before you use it. Actually, the initial purpose of mak-
ing the problem tangible is to make clear to you what you know and do not 
know  about  your  problem  and  what  the  current  version  of  your  problem  
requires of any solution. There is always at least one part you need that you  
already know how to use—like the billboard in the Greenpeace story. Later, 
in hindsight, you’ll distinguish a sequence of fact-finding “missions” that took 
the form of experiments or conversations that revealed the nuances of the 
problem you seek to solve and the parts or people that led you to insights.

Parts and knowledge

In foresight, these experiments can be sorted by what you stand to learn from 
them and how much they cost. The guiding principle should be that you want 
to  learn  a  vastly  disproportionate,  indeed  unreasonable,  amount  with  the 
money you have now, rather than postponing learning for when you have 
more money. That is how you choose the facts to seek first. I discuss this in 
chapter 9.

To  be  clear:  the  point  here  is 
not  about  bringing  parts  together 
to build the next gizmo. It is about 
acquiring knowledge about a prob-
lem from those parts—in much the 
same way as you acquire knowledge 
from  other  people  (discussed  in 
chapter  4).  With  the  resources  at 
hand,  you  bring  parts  together  to 
get  the  most  information  about 
the ways in which you are currently 
wrong.

Don’t postpone learning; 

learn a disproportionate 

amount with what you 

have now.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

83

Parts and the Questions They Answer

In essence, “parts” are everything that are not people. Everything. If your 
idea  evolves  into  a  commercial  organization,  for  instance,  the  actual 
components of a gizmo, your service offerings, the distribution channels, 
and even components of a strategy will all be parts that survived your 
innovating. You can give them names at this early stage, but I recommend 
you simply think of them as interchangeable building blocks—parts—
that you are going to play around with a lot. You’ll dispose of some, and 
you’ll enlist some new ones.

How these building blocks interact with one another is your choice. 
Their  function  will  change  as  well.  At  first,  they  will  mostly  serve  the 
purpose of making the problem tangible for you. Later, they will have to 
make the problem tangible and solved for others as well.

From  an  operational  standpoint,  a  part  is  anything  you  can  order, 
procure, simulate, or otherwise use to make your problem tangible. To 
identify the parts you need, you may have to demand more from your 
hunch and expect it to answer questions like these:

•  What makes this hunch so special? What do I need to obtain to 
simulate that?
•  What could go wrong? What do I need to do (experiment or 
otherwise) to show that it is wrong or assess whether it is even 
possible?
•  Can I build something with which to demonstrate the function 
my hunch calls for?
•  Is there an experiment that will give me more information or 
demonstrate a specific feature my hunch may be lacking?

In one of my classes, a group of students wanted to consider various 
opportunities related to the so-called smart electric grid. They needed an 
electrical grid to play with. One option was to start coding to create a 
software simulation of an electrical grid. The problem with that is that 
one such simulation would be only as good as the assumptions they made 
in coding the software.

84 

CHAPTER 3

Fortunately, nature computes in real time. So, rather than a software 
simulation, I suggested they think about a version of the problem that 
could  be  set  up  at  table  scale  and  then  begin  by  simulating  what  the 
solution would have to accomplish at that scale.

In the end, they needed only a few cables, some variable generation 
sources,  and  a  means  to  simulate  demand  patterns  with  a  few  variable 
resistors that they could coordinate with microcontrollers. Nothing they 
used was any more complex or expensive than stuff you could pick up for 
a few dollars at your local hobby shop.

I contend that you can acquire knowledge you need about your problem 
as you try using parts, and my experience is that just about anyone can be 
trained in a single day to use a wide array of parts purposefully for innovation 
prototyping. It all boils down to two things. One is looking at parts in a dif-
ferent way as meaningful, tangible representations of aspects of your prob-
lem. The other is accepting that you don’t need to know everything about 
what makes a specific part work; you need only learn how to use it in the 
context of your problem.

This is not an argument against whatever knowledge you may already 
have—which is valuable—or an argument in favor of outsourcing your in-
novating. It is an invitation to view that knowledge as an asset rather than 
allowing it to become a constraint—an idea discussed later in the chapter in 
the context of what it means to use accessible parts and knowledge.

You really don’t need to know every single thing 

there is to know about a part before you use it.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

85

I can give you a simple illustration of how, with minimal instruction, you 
can learn to use parts and build from them without any previous knowledge 
of why those parts work together. Instructions for creating rainbow-colored 
milk are offered on the Internet as a STEM activity to do with kids; the parts 
you need are whole milk, food coloring, a dish, a cotton swab, and soap. 

as you try using  

parts.

You can acquire 

knowledge you need 

about your problem  

For  older  children—potential  young 
scientists—the activity is presented as way 
to  teach  about  chemistry,  the  concept  of 
hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups, and 
repulsive  forces.  But  the  outcome  is  the 
same  regardless  of  how  much  chemistry 
you aspire to learn: When a cotton swab 
dipped  in  soap  touches  the  thin  layer  of 
milk in the dish, colors rush away from the 
drops  of  food  coloring  and  begin  flying 
around. Toddlers are thrilled by the visual 
experiment and enjoy playing around with 
the parts. Curious children, regardless of age, will want to do variations on 
the experiment, try different liquids, or build on the experiment by trying 
something new, such as creating a video of the experiment to show at school. 
Knowledge of chemistry, though handy, is not required in either case. Intui-
tive knowledge of chemistry, however, can be an outcome.

After following the instructions a couple of times, you may wonder what 

else you might do. That’s when the fun begins.

Perhaps you want to understand why you see the colors rush away. That 
is precisely what the instructions will entice you to do—act like a scientist, 
they say. You may change the substrate from whole milk to something else. 
You may measure how long it takes for colors to fly about. There are many 
things you could try. You’ll learn to master the experiment.

Perhaps you don’t feel like acting like a scientist today. You may won-
der—now  that  you  know  how  to  put  the  parts  together—what  else  you 
might use this activity for. For instance, you could modify the shape of the 
plate and place colors strategically so that when the colors start flying around 

86 

CHAPTER 3

they spell out a name. Maybe you’ll record your experiment and post it on 
YouTube.

There are subtle differences between these two directions. In the first, 
your objective is to characterize a phenomenon. The second is a way to “use” 
science—regardless of how much you understand of it—for a purpose other 
than learning the particular science itself. It’s a lot like “working” with your 
hunch when it is not yet fully formed: you may need to play around with 
some parts to make the purpose clear to you.

Choosing to “use” the science doesn’t mean you waive understanding the 
underlying science altogether. Indeed, as you perfect your idea, you will still 
find yourself needing to experiment further, and you may end up doing some 
of the same experiments your “scientist self ” would have done. Your purpose, 
however,  will  be  very  different:  Rather  than  recording  the  chemical  and 
physical behavior against a set of abstract parameters, you will focus on build-
ing something you envision. You will end up picking up part of the science 
intuitively or by asking questions of experts (who are people, of course, and 
so are the subject of chapter 4), but the knowledge you acquire and the ques-
tions you pose will be driven by what you want to accomplish—not by the 
general model of science the instructions of the original experiment want 
you to learn. As a rule of thumb, when your purpose isn’t to understand the 
science itself, the knowledge about the science you need can be more target-
ed and you can acquire it as you go. Either way, the parts are the same. What 
changes is how you go about using them.

Parts for “use” and scale

In this chapter, I ask that you think of parts as in the second direction above, 
driven by what you want to use them for. In a way, I am asking you to take on 
faith  that  whenever  you  need  to  understand  more  fully  why  parts  work, 
you’ll be able to do so by “debugging” or by asking targeted questions of oth-
ers who you believe to be more knowledgeable than you are about the under-
lying phenomena. Of course, you won’t really know whether they are until 
you ask your specific questions.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

87

The example above is but a cursory introduction to how to think about 
parts. All the parts are material, and the science is accessible. However, every-
thing I have said about the two directions in the rainbow-colored-milk ex-
ample applies to more complex science and also to social and organizational 
measures you might propose to address a problem. You can indeed produce 
parts, workflows, and dynamics with which to simulate, at scale, just about 
anything.

Implicit in this mind-set is that the focus on a real-world problem invites 
you to imagine that every part you bring into your problem is, in a way, a 
scaled-down representation of a larger reality. With a sense of what it may 
take to solve your problem, your objective is to “demonstrate”—first to your-
self—what makes the problem real at the smaller scale that matches your re-
sources. That begins with parts.

“Parts” defined

What do I mean by “parts”? I am using the word as generally as you can possibly 
imagine. I want to disabuse you of any sort of binary thinking you may employ 
when it comes to parts, as in “this is a part” and “this is not a part.” A part does not 
have to be something like what your auto mechanic would get from the “parts 
store.”

The simple definition of “parts” for innovating is this: whatever—and I gen-
uinely mean whatever—you can bring together at a small enough scale that il-
lustrates something about the problem and, in doing so, reveals what you may want 
to do next. In other words, parts in this context are what help you specify your 
problem, the result of which is one or more versions of a better problem to solve.
Conversely, whatever you exclude from potentially being a part might have 
helped you—but never will. So, rather than pondering whether something is or 
isn’t a part, you may want just to assume it is a part and instead ask what you 
might be able to do or demonstrate with it.

If your parts are diagrams, you’ll illustrate an abstract concept, perhaps a 
business model. If they are plaster and cardboard, you’ll illustrate form. If 

88 

CHAPTER 3

they are mechanical gears and microcontrollers, you’ll illustrate function. If 
they are org charts, you’ll illustrate organizations. If they are patents and aca-
demic papers—yes, they can be considered parts—you’ll illustrate the use of 
some basic science. As you demonstrate a problem, you may need to consider 
each and every one of these at some time. For the most abstract parts (such as 
business models or patents), you’ll have to think about whether showing—
say—a diagram is enough or whether you are better off somehow enacting 
what it shows.

One way to get started thinking about parts in this manner is to work 
backward from your problem. You may think of parts as elements of your 
imagined solution. Or you may think of parts that help you reproduce some-
thing your imagined solution must achieve. Or you may think of parts that 

Parts are whatever you can use to illustrate 
something about a problem and reveal what to do 

at the next scale. Parts represent a larger reality.

help you verify that a proposed solution actually solves your problem. These 
are the same three structural elements of well-defined problem. Any of these 
parts might be part of an artifact, part of a larger system, or an auxiliary part 
whose  main  purpose  is  to  inform  the  next  version  of  the  problem  you’re 
solving.

Auxiliary parts deserve special attention. When you are learning to draw, 
you are taught to begin drawing circles, geometric figures, and auxiliary lines 
to get the basic shape right. Those “parts” will not make it into the final 
drawing, but they do play a critical role in getting the shape and the propor-
tions right. Similarly, the cranes and scaffolds used in erecting new buildings 
play a critical role in the process but don’t make it into the finished structure. 

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

89

The concept is used also in mathematics, in which geometrical constructions 
or lemmas simplify and often make it altogether possible to come up with a 
proof. On occasion, significant innovation goes into developing these “auxil-
iary” parts.

Ford’s assembly line could be considered an example of an auxiliary part 
that became an innovation. In the rainbow-colored-milk example, the color 
is an auxiliary part. The phenomenon you observe is the same one you get 
when you use soap to clean a pan: Fat and oil flee away from the soap. If you 
are using the activity to learn science, food coloring is but an auxiliary part 
that aids visualization. If you opted for producing a video, the food coloring 
that  was  an  auxiliary  part  may  become  the  most  important  part  in  your  
experiment,  and  you  may  find  yourself  experimenting  about  the  effect  
of color.

Choosing parts by the aspect of your problem they make real (based on examples found throughout 
this book)

Type of part

Imagined solution

What needs to  
be accomplished

How you verify  
your solution

Component of an 
artifact

Flash lamp from 
photography catalogue 
(laser)

Raspberry Pi 
(CreepyDOL)

Altimeter (X-Prize)

Element of a larger 
system

Billboards or ham 
radio 
(Greenpeace) Business 
model

Conference 
(CreepyDOL)

Performance standards, 
such as those that 
might be established 
through regulation 
(e.g., E 911 standards)

Auxiliary

Strawberry (infectious 
diseases)

Power supply (physical 
simulation of Smart 
Grid)

Focus groups

90 

CHAPTER 3

The purpose of parts and prototyping

You need parts to prototype each and every aspect of your problem—from 
the reasonably obvious components of a gizmo to the less obvious aspects of 
the organization that will serve the solution.

I am using the word “prototyping” in a way that may seem atypical. Typi-
cally, prototyping is thought of as a means to create an artifact or a version of 
a solution, and a part is but one element of that solution. You imagine your 
solution will be some sort of phone, and so you set out from the beginning to 
include a part that is a screen. But that is just one of the ways of thinking 
about parts I’ve just given you.

The way I have introduced prototyping a problem in previous chapters 
gives you a choice as to what you start assembling. Sure, you may assemble a 
mockup of a solution, but you may also try to bring parts together to simu-
late how the world would look once the problem is no longer there, or you 
may choose to simulate the problem itself or assemble parts that will allow 
you to verify that the problem is solved.

Your choice of what to prototype may determine the parts you need to 
acquire. Conversely, the parts you have available may make it easier to proto-
type something other than the solution.

On non-tangible aspects and parts

Thus far, my examples have involved mostly material parts. It would be only 
natural for you to object that this approach pertains only to problems that 
can be addressed with some kind of a tangible gizmo. Parts, though, are but 
a means to reproduce function at scale, and you can reproduce function of 
tangible and non-tangible aspects of your problem alike. For instance, some 
aspects of your problem can be and often are less tangible than others, and 
their function may be best introduced into your innovation prototype with 
workflows and processes that affect how the entire organization you build 
functions at scale.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

91

Here is a straightforward example (like the one above for material parts) 
in which the non-tangible aspects are a mixture of a business model and an 
analysis of a supply chain—both parts: You probably buy your apples from a 
grocery store that gets them from a distributor, or from a farmers’ market to 
which the grower brings them directly. Before that, the apples were picked, 
either by the grower or a crew of workers, and before that the grower tended 
the trees. You pay the grocer, but you can think of your money as being di-
vided into different portions allotted to the grocer, the grower, the pickers, 
the distributors, and so on—although in reality all of that is largely settled 
before you buy your apples.

Where I live in New England, many families go apple picking as an out-
door activity in the early fall. In that context, the same orchard, the same 
grower, and the same trees now address a different problem altogether and 
have become part of that family activity. The difference is two non-material 
parts that you may not typically think of as parts: the business model and the 
pickers.

Whatever  problem  you  envision  has  both  tangible  and  intangible  as-
pects. By the time the problem is solved, you’ll be able to point to a definite 
set of components in some organization that contributes to addressing every 
aspect of the problem, regardless of whether you initially thought of that as-
pect of the problem as tangible. Being able to point to those components 
now affords you clarity that is worth having as early as possible, if for no 
other reason than it will make it easier to change them if they don’t work.

Getting this clarity early on is much easier than you may think. It re-
quires that you adopt a principle: “Everything can be demonstrated tangibly 
in some way.” Your job is to find a way to bring parts together so that even the 
non-tangible aspect of your problem can be illustrated tangibly.

The box titled “Even Non-Tangible Aspects of Your Problem Have  
Material Parts” shows how you may go about formulating a non-tangible  
aspect of your innovating in terms of material parts.

92 

CHAPTER 3

Even Non-Tangible Aspects of Your Problem  

Have Material Parts

It’s a challenge to think through the non-tangible aspects of an emerging 
problem or organization as something that can be represented with parts. 
Tangible  aspects  of  a  problem  have  technical  dimensions  and  units  by 
which they can be specified. They exemplify the specificity with which 
you should strive to understand even the non-tangible aspects. But those 
non-tangible  aspects  that  may  at  some  point  become  tangible—in  the 
form of a business model, manufacturing in large volumes, distribution, 
referrals,  a  value  chain,  complementary  assets,  messaging,  a  value 
proposition, social impact, and so on—do not always come with the extra 
help of being pre-specified.

Still,  your  success  could  well  depend  on  making  the  non-tangible 
aspects just as concrete and well specified—and there’s a rather simple 
way to do that. It begins with the realization that what’s tangible often 
changes  with  scale.  At  some  point,  those  aspects  will  be  tangible,  too. 
There’s got to be some way to simulate, illustrate, or demonstrate tangibly 
their  function  today.  That  is,  you  must  dissociate  what  needs  to  be 
achieved from the nuances that will be introduced through scale-up.

The process goes more or less as follows:

•  Diagram. If it will eventually be material and tangible, sketch an 
illustration of what will be achieved and how. Flow diagrams work 
well for this purpose.
•  Enact. Have multiple people participate in enacting your flow 
chart to develop a “variational” understanding of what happens 
when things do not go exactly as planned. (If you’ve ever played 
Monopoly, you’ve done this before, enacting the life of a real-estate 
mogul at scale. Your “variational” understanding could come from 
erecting hotels on a property than no one ever ends up landing on. 
An enactment like that is a better demonstration of what ought to 
be accomplished than simply producing a flow chart.)
•  Emulate. You can often come up with simple parts with which  
to illustrate, simulate, or emulate what you learned from your 
enactment.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

93

If you have worked the non-tangible aspects of your problem into your 
innovation prototype, it will be more difficult for you to ignore them. It 
will be easier to reason about scale-up if they are a part of your innovation 
prototype from the get-go.

There are several tools you can use for inspiration, if not as parts, to 
help materialize non-tangible aspects of your innovating. The Beer Game 
teaches you how to enact and think about disruption in a supply chain.* 
Online A/B testing can show you how online users interact with your 
idea.** The business model canvas, though generally limited in scope to 
consumer products, offers a “LEGO-like” view of common components 
of  a  business  model.***  I  offer  these  examples  without  endorsement; 
choosing the parts that apply to your innovating is part of your job.

The  following  straightforward  questions  illustrate  how  you  may  go 

about turning the less tangible aspects of your innovating into parts:

•  How will my idea get where it needs to go?
•  What will people see as a demonstration that it works?
•  What does a transaction look like? What else might people need 
in order to benefit?
•  Is there a way to rearrange parts that changes costs, prices, 
regulation, and value?

 *Jay  W.  Forrester,  “Industrial  dynamics:  A  major  breakthrough  for  decision 
makers,” Harvard Business Review 36, no. 4, 1958: 37–66. 
 **Ron  Kohavi  and  Roger  Longbotham,  “Online  controlled  experiments  and   
A/B tests,” in Encyclopedia of Machine Learning, Springer, 2011; Brian Christian, 
“The A/B Test: Inside the technology that’s changing the rules of business,” Wired, 
April 25, 2012.  

 ***Alexander  Osterwalder  and  Yves  Pigneur,  Business  Model  Generation:  A 

Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers, Wiley, 2010.

94 

CHAPTER 3

Parts in action: a demonstration from my workshop

I contend that with your problem and some parts, you can take some amaz-
ing steps along the path to innovation. Allow me to tell you about a work-
shop I ran at MIT that demonstrated this very thing. It shows not only how 
powerful working with parts can be, but also how motivating it can be to 
engage in innovation prototyping once you realize you can dismiss the fear 
of failure in favor of learning.

A few years ago, forty-plus students walked into an MIT classroom to 
engage in the workshop. Most had come from abroad and expected to have 
plenty of time to take in the sights of the Boston area and even make a side 
trip to New York City. They were mostly wrong about the side trips—and 
not because I was a cruel taskmaster.

Twenty days and nearly 300 hours of mostly self-driven work later, work-
shop participants had produced innovation prototypes comprised of gizmos, 
websites, and primary market research. They had advocated for their innova-
tion prototypes to an audience of people from MIT’s vaunted innovation 
ecosystem, and they were ready to begin to address scale with clarity on what 
to do next to further their understanding of the problem. 

Few, if any, visited New York City. Instead, they chose to spend their 
nights and weekends practicing a different kind of tourism: visiting stake-
holders, learning about impact, and tinkering with technology. On the last 
day of the workshop, they presented their plans. One group demonstrated a 
system to manage inventories with machine vision—video of an on-site dem-
onstration with a user and launch strategy included. Another showed a phys-
ical prototype of a smart electric grid that allowed them to formulate an aca-
demia-industry  research  project.  A  third  group  demonstrated  a  robotic 
system to increase patient compliance.

Three months after the workshop, I ran into one of the participants—a 
theoretical physicist—on the MIT campus. Before the workshop had begun, 
he had argued that the closer to a published paper, the purer the innovation, 
and that everything needed to be new to call something an innovation. Now, 

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

95

however, he was quoting chapters 1 and 2: “You have an idea? Okay. What 
should you ask? Who should you ask? What’s the closest thing to your idea 
you can put together to start to make it real? What parts should you start 
putting together? For a handful of dollars, you can put a few technology 
parts together and become much smarter about which questions you want to 
ask.” Then he opened his backpack and showed me an assortment of parts he 
was carrying around with him. He intended to prototype a real-world prob-
lem rather than study it mathematically and write a paper about it.

I led another workshop the next summer. This time around, we added 
options for participants to prototype biotech innovations—something many 
thought could only be done with access to specialized labs. The workshop 
results were just as impressive. We got to see plans and prototypes for an or-
ganization working to shorten the time it takes to diagnose infectious dis-
eases with a portable DNA analyzer (mentioned in chapter 2), for robotic 
irrigation systems, and for a machine-vision approach to turning social net-
works into real social support networks.

This happened because these participants had done what the theoretical 
physicist had quoted from me (that appears in chapters 1 and 2). Workshop 
participants learned to acquire knowledge on-demand—when they needed 
it—  rather  than  encyclopedically.  They  reasoned  about  problems  to  be 
solved, and learned to own their projects through quick and productive fail-
ure events. They came to understand the difference between decidable prob-
lems  and  causes,  and  practiced  how  to  refine  problems  by  tinkering  with 
technology and impact together.

They also learned that the first steps in innovating are fueled more by 
bringing together new combinations of parts than by raising large sums of 
investment capital. Some call the outcome of this combining of parts “cre-
ativity.” The parts—whatever parts you bring together—play a big role in 
conveying that you don’t need lots of money to start, which workshop par-
ticipants  absorbed  as  they  experienced  the  artificial  constraint  on  the  re-
sources to which they had access. You can find what you need for prototyp-
ing pretty much anything simply by searching for inexpensive and readily 

96 

CHAPTER 3

An innovation is generally supported by knowledge from multiple disciplines, but only a frac-
tion of that knowledge. It might be more advisable at times to think of an innovation as a disci-
pline of its own and acquire knowledge on demand, just as other disciplines acquire knowledge.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

97

available parts online, and get them in only a day or two. Dr. Maiman ex-
plained this very principle when he described how he developed the first 
working laser, and Steve Wozniak alluded to it when he described what he 
thought he and others were doing when the Apple I came to be (see chapter 1).

A World of Available Parts

There  are  parts  that  you  already  own.  There  are  myriad  technical 
components  and  parts  you  can  order  online.  Beyond  that,  there  are 
educational  resources,  including  complete  course  outlines,  books, 
MOOCs, and so on, all easily accessible and all also parts. Your need for 
any particular part may be immediate or become apparent only down the 
road. The latter is probably the case with online services that help you 
build websites painlessly, or marketing and strategy resources that include 
toolkits  for  generating  business  models,  doing  web  analytics,  and 
conducting A/B testing (randomized experiments with two variants)—
also, all parts. Then there are outsourcing resources that run the gamut 
from  accounting  to  contract  management  to  order  management  and 
fulfillment, not to mention small-batch contract manufacturing. Again, 
these are all parts.

At table scale, though, it is an abundance of inexpensive parts that aid 
you in prototyping virtually anything. You are the beneficiary of a surge of 
resources  made  available  by  do-it-yourself  enthusiasts  and  open-source 
communities, and by the trend toward “democratizing” innovation. The 
Web has become a paradise for hands-on-innovators.

Where do you begin your search for parts? The answer comes from 

asking yourself these questions:

•  What do I need my innovation prototype to do?
•  What is available to me that gets me close to that?
•  What do I want to show as possible (first to yourself, and 
eventually to others)? What do I need to show? 
•  What can I acquire for that purpose at a cost that doesn’t make 
me think twice?

98 

CHAPTER 3

Only you can decide what is an “affordable” investment in your prob-
lem. In the workshops I’ve run, we set the limit arbitrarily at $100 per 
part. To get a part that costs more, you have to explain why you would be 
willing to pay for it yourself.

A part is as good to you as the function or the aspect of your problem 
it allows you to demonstrate—no matter how unsophisticated the part. 
The $100 limit is an artificial way to force people to question how invested 
they really are. If you aren’t willing to cough up a few hundred dollars to 
make your problem tangible, then you are the first one who doesn’t care 
enough about your problem. You shouldn’t find it surprising that others 
don’t care either.

The specific parts you use at any time are important because they help 
you understand your problem, not because they may or may not be part of an 
eventual “innovation.”

The best thing about working with parts as I’ve described is that it is 
liberating. The early prototypes in the stories I mention in chapter 1 are in-
distinguishable from what may have been the starting point of any “failed” 
company. That is, the innovation is not in those early prototypes any more 
than it needs to be in yours. It is in what is yet to come. And the value is not 
in the prototypes per se but in what they demonstrate to be possible. You get 
to go about innovating the way Dr. Maiman acquired parts for his laser, pos-
sibly with greater ease. He had to read through catalogs; you get to search for 
your parts on the Web.

Working with parts at scale

A broad definition of parts is not only proper for innovating, but also makes 
your life as an innovator easier: It removes unnecessary constraints on how 
you think about innovating.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

99

To you, parts come in two flavors: parts that help you represent a tangi-
ble aspect of your problem and parts that help you emulate something that 
you will only understand as tangible at a larger scale. If your part is material, 
you’ll have to figure out how to put it together with the other parts and then 
set it  in motion, turn it on, or point to it. If it is a diagram, you’ll have to 
decide between showing it and enacting it. The more physical the parts, the 
easier it is to converse with them and have them tell you what makes your 
idea wrong.

The parts you use help you understand your 

problem even if they never become part of an 

eventual “innovation.”

Essentially, your task is to find a part for every aspect of your problem 
you want to make tangible at the current scale. To get to the next scale, you 
should strive to make as much of the problem tangible as is needed to per-
suade you it’s worth spending any more of your time on it. You may think of 
yourself as “investor zero.” Getting to the next scale will require letting your 
imagination run a bit wild and pretending that your parts represent some-
thing else. This can be fun to do. Chapter 2 includes one such example: the 
team of students who pretended a strawberry could be a bacterium so they 
could imagine a solution to increase successful treating of infectious diseases 
by  expediting  diagnoses.  Using  the  strawberry  allowed  them  to  postpone 
costly access to a facility with a biosafety level of at least 3 at no risk to them 
or others, all the while learning what needed to be accomplished once they 
sought that access.

I got that team started with a simple exercise not much different from 
making rainbow milk. Simple and easily obtainable parts were required: one 
strawberry, one resealable plastic bag, one teaspoon of salt, two teaspoons of

100 

CHAPTER 3

Would You Have Ever Thought a Strawberry  

Could Be a Bacterium?

Probably not, but a question like that only emerges in hindsight. Here’s 
how you get to an answer that motivates such a question.

You  could  spend  a  lot  of  money  to  rent  an  adequate  facility,  hire 
professionals skilled at sample preparation, procure bacteria with all the 
regulation and safety considerations that entails, plan experiments, and so 
on—all to assess whether you might have a way to identify bacteria rapidly 
through DNA analysis.

Might  there  be  a  faster  and  less  costly  way  to  try  to  prove  yourself 
wrong? After all, everything hinges on the risks involved in handling one 
particular part: bacteria. Is there a way to replace that part?

If your thinking got you to the point of asking that question, you might 
turn to a friend who knows more biology than you do. That’s what I did, 
and  I  learned  that  a  strawberry  contains  eight  strands  of  DNA—four 
times as many as you do—which makes DNA extraction, preparation, 
and detection easy. It’s a strawberry, so unless you’re allergic you know it’s 
safe.

It  turns  out  that  for  the  purpose  of  testing  an  idea,  a  strawberry  is 
indistinguishable from a bacterium—and a lot easier to handle. Plus, you 
can  conduct  a  scaled-down  version  of  your  experiment  in  a  kitchen,  a 
place for which you already pay rent or perhaps even own.

To be sure, this will change the order in which you do some things. 
You’ll still need access to specialized facilities—eventually. But by then it 
will be to answer highly specialized, targeted questions that justify the 
expense.

Incidentally, those are the targeted questions you arrive at by asking 
yourself what differences between a bacterium and a strawberry matter 
for whatever you’re doing. Those questions are in large part associated 
with scale. Once you have a strawberry-powered prototype, it becomes 
easy to address tangibly what those questions ought to be.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

101

dish detergent, half a cup of water, two plastic cups, one coffee filter, 90 per-
cent rubbing alcohol (ice cold), paper towels, and some coffee. As they pro-
totyped the problem, they added other parts: some tubing, a few small mod-
el-size motors, some LEGO blocks, a microcontroller no more sophisticated 
than the one in your house’s thermostat, and eventually a PCR chip, a por-
table electrophoresis device, a strategy for deploying their idea in developing 
countries, and a website explaining the project and the organization. In the 
end,  they  demonstrated—at  scale—a  not-for-profit  organization  to  diag-
nose infectious diseases in developing countries an order of magnitude faster 
than is typically done today.

When you work with parts the way I propose, you can view the scale at 
which you demonstrate your problem and your solution, or certain aspects 
of your problem, as a choice.

Also in chapter 2, I describe how some aspiring innovators wanted to 
prototype a pill that would signal when it had dissolved fully. The problem 
they wanted to solve was patient compliance. Unfortunately, they fell in love 
with their product idea and ended up obsessing so much about the impossi-
bility of prototyping a small enough pill to demonstrate the concept that 
being right about that impossibility became almost more important than the 
pill itself.

Regardless of the merit, there was a way to prototype their pill idea and 
get to the questions that would have allowed them to improve what they 
wanted to accomplish. Instead of obsessing about the small size of a pill, they 
could have treated the human body as if it were that of a giant. Then, to pro-
totype their idea, they could have used accessible, affordable parts—for ex-
ample, standard-size, easily accessible RFID chips; cereal to coat the chips; 
some kind of container to simulate a larger-than-life human stomach; and 
some fat to coat the container (for a realistic representation of the giant hu-
man in the prototype).

After that demonstration, they could focus their “obsession” towards a 
more productive endeavor: the specifics involved in scaling up—which, in 
this case, implied also bringing the pill artifact down to realistic human size. 
Is  this  solution  meaningfully  addressing  medication  compliance?  What 
parts are missing? How strong a signal does the swallowed pill need to send? 

102 

CHAPTER 3

What is required to pass regulation (a part)? What would human testing 
involve (a part)? These questions all point to the next set of parts needed for 
innovating, and they drive the conversation away from the initial obsession 
about a pill and into specifics about where they might need to innovate.

Sorting Through Parts to Identify Non-Tangible  

Aspects of Your Problem

The material parts you may use to imagine the larger reality are easier to 
identify than the parts you may use to emulate non-tangible aspects your 
organization you will have to address. That is, it is easier to come up with 
an idea for a “gizmo” than to come up with a full system of organizations, 
regulation, services, and agents. The RFID pill is one such example.

Sometimes  regulations  and  markets  stipulate  specific  standards  to 
which you must adhere; you can think of these as parts and reproduce 
them as checklists. These checklists are easier to follow against a prototype 
than they are in abstract.

Finding ways to make organizational parts tangible is a key part of your 
innovating. For next to nothing, you may find resources online that can 
help  you  emulate  or  prototype  an  organization.  You  can  find  legal 
information and templates for a variety of needs online. The websites of 
government agencies guide you through what’s required, and government 
regulations offer specifications that may guide you to select certain parts 
over others.

But there was no guarantee that the pill the students had imagined would 
solve the problem of patient compliance they had set out to address. Perhaps, 
though, what they learned and the specific questions their first prototype 
triggered would lead them to restate their problem in myriad new ways. Be-
fore I had suggested a path to bring the problem to table scale, they had ar-
gued that they had no choice but to raise money to produce a proof of con-
cept. There certainly are ways to be wrong more quickly with less effort and 
less money—and to learn something along the way.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

103

Parts demonstrate a larger reality

At first, coming up with parts for imagining a larger reality can feel some-
what daunting. But all you really have to do is put together a demonstration 
of your problem—a demonstration that is not only visual but also functional 
and tangible, with parts you can move around. If all you have are Post-its, you 
can  most  certainly  start  there  and  outline  each  and  every  element  of  the 
problem and how you will solve it—so long as you can resist the urge to 
“brainstorm” with those Post-its. But Post-its can’t demonstrate function, so 
sooner or later you’ll have to come up with a way to replace some of them 
with useful parts that do something.

Example of Specification of a Non-Tangible Part

Let me take you through an example of how you may specify parts that 
illustrate non-tangible aspects of your problem in a way that allows you to 
imagine multiple larger realities.

As  chapter  4  shows,  you  are  always  better  off  thinking  about  your 
innovation as eventually serving a community, mainly because members 
of a community speak to one another. If they did not speak to one another, 
you  would  have  to  find  a  way  to  speak  to  every  community  member 
individually, which would make for a rather poor scale-up strategy.

You need a part that captures how the word will spread in a community. 

Let’s call it a part for referrals.

There are all sorts of referrals. If your innovating leads you to a mass-
market  retail  product,  your  best  referrals  may  come  by  attracting  a 
celebrity who will endorse what you’ve created. You’ll need to know how 
much  the  celebrity  charges  to  be  the  public  face  of  your  product,  and 
you’ll need to think about the community the celebrity will reach.

If you are thinking about an industrial product or a commodity chem-
ical, your referrals will come from your existing customers. You will need to 
think of each customer as an investment in a demonstrable outcome and in 
terms of the communities they may be able to reach. Note that in some 
cases the communities may be in industries that are somehow adjacent.

104 

CHAPTER 3

You  can  specify  the  role  of  the  non-tangible  part  referral  in  your 
innovation by at least two parameters: the investment required to create a 
referral  and  the  kind  of  community  a  referral  will  unveil.  You  can  use 
referrals as a part in your prototype to represent all three larger realities 
above. You may eventually call these referrers lead users, strategic partners, 
key  opinion  leaders,  early  adopters,  or  something  else.  However,  the 
fundamental characteristic that makes them attractive to you remains the 
same: Investing in referrals stands to open up a community.

Another quick example is implementing the “affordable” aspect of the 
Model  T.  Ford  ended  up  requiring  at  least  three  non-tangible  parts:  a 
financing  model,  an  increase  in  wages,  and  a  method  to  assemble  cars 
efficiently  to  increase  daily  factory  output.  These  non-tangible  parts 
enabled  and  constrained  different  aspects  of  the  tangible  parts  no  less 
than the engineering design of the car.

Once you get used to this way of thinking, you’ll find it increasingly eas-
ier to see parts for their demonstration value rather than for what they “offi-
cially” are meant to do. Think of it a bit like pretend-play, not unlike how, at 
some point earlier in your life, you may have found it perfectly natural to see 
a sofa for the castle it conceals—two throw pillows away from becoming a 
spaceship. Let me get you started with some examples of how you might use 
parts to imagine larger realities.

Parts mind-set: seeing a sofa for the castle it 

conceals—two throw pillows away from becoming a 

spaceship. 

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

105

All Kinds of Parts

Here  are  some  examples  (an  exhaustive  list  would  be  too  long)  of  the 
kinds of accessible parts you may find across very different domains and 
that you’d likely be able to afford out of pocket (i.e., for about $100, on 
average). For illustration purposes, I emphasize things you may not have 
imagined are so easily obtained.

From the “technology” world: nanoparticles, microcontrollers, micro-
fluidics kits, PCR machines, all kinds of sensors (and motors and lasers), 
mini-computers, portable mass spectrometers, DNA primers, strawberries, 
backyard  wind  turbines,  scientific  and  educational  kits,  software-
development  kits  (Apple,  Bitcoin),  product-development  kits  for 
anything from robots (LEGO, iRobot) to wireless electricity (WiTricity).
From  the  management  world:  marketing  resources  and  components 
made available by the Lean movement, the Disciplined Entrepreneurship 
“toolbox”  and  its  24  steps,  design  thinking,  permission  marketing, 
inbound marketing, and so on; resources to view strategy and business 
models as composed of modules, including the Business Model Canvas 
and the Blue Ocean Strategy; online metrics and measures with which to 
assess  impact,  including  A/B  testing  and  online  surveys;  impact 
visualization tools such as D3.js, Google Analytics, Cytoscape, and so on.
From the communications world: painless development environments 
such as Wix and Squarespace; social media campaigns through Twitter, 
Facebook, and so on; crowdfunding.

From the legal world: regulations (governmental or market) and the 
specific standards they stipulate; legal information and templates for a 
variety  of  needs,  such  as  those  offered  by  LegalZoom;  guides  to 
requirements on government websites.

Finally, there is knowledge. You can go as deep as searching papers and 
reading the specification of patents, or you can get started with less. For 
nearly  everything  you  may  imagine  someone  can  teach,  you  can  find 
online  a  specialized  educational  or  scientific  kit  that  will  make  you 
smarter. At the very least, it will teach you what knowledge you need to 
acquire on your own or with others. For example, MIT’s Nanomaker* will 
teach you how to build your own solar cell with sunscreen and raspberry 
jam.  Spectruino  and  NZnano**  teach  how  to  build  homemade  spec-
trometers for under $500. There are all kinds of other online resources 

106 

CHAPTER 3

for acquiring knowledge through doing: instructables, the open-source 
communities  surrounding  Arduino  and  Raspberry  Pi,  online  physics 
chemistry  education  resources,***  maker  communities,  and  YouTube 
channels such Veritasium,**** to name only a few.

The bottom line: these examples make it nearly impossible for you to 

use lack of availability as an excuse for not getting started.

*http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science 
/6-s079-nanomaker-spring-2013/

**http://nznano.blogspot.com.au/2011/12/homemade-spectrometerspectrophotometer.

html; http://myspectral.com/

***See, for instance, “Science Is Fun in the Lab of Shakhashir,” at http://scifun.chem.

wisc.edu.

****http://youtube.com/user/1veritasium

Making the most of parts you do have

You are allowed to be wrong. It’s easier to identify that you are wrong and 
figure out why than to obsess over whether you might be right. What parts 
should you get, then? As you are getting started, just about anything that is 
accessible to you will do. You don’t need any kind of technical education 
(whether in marketing or in engineering) to choose your parts. And whereas 
many years ago it might have seemed necessary to have access to a scrap yard, 
today you can order almost anything online, have it delivered to your door 
within  days,  and  find  basic  how-to  information  on  the  Web.  If  you  feel 
strongly enough about your hunch to derive some purpose from it, neither 
parts, nor people, nor knowledge are the limiting factor to getting started.

The following principles, also summarized in the next box, can guide you 

as you try to identify parts with which to make your problem tangible.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

107

Principles to Guide Identifying Parts for Making  

Your Problem Tangible

1.  Everything can be demonstrated tangibly in some way. The 
only limits to what kinds of parts you may bring together are 
limits you impose yourself.
2.  At first, everything you might obtain is an auxiliary part: Parts 
extend your power over nature so you can demonstrate a problem 
tangibly.
3.  Everything already in your possession is accessible and hence 
could be used as parts.
4.  What you don’t already own but need is probably easy to 
obtain at little or no cost. The alternative is to accept that what 
you need is beyond your resources.
5.  Parts help you glean what might go wrong at the next scale.

Everything can be demonstrated tangibly in some way. The only limits to 
what kinds of parts you may bring together are limits you impose yourself. To 
develop the kind of seemingly preposterous propositions that led to innova-
tions—Ford, Greenpeace, and other examples already mentioned—that we 
now consider obvious, you must allow for the possibility of bringing togeth-
er parts that do not seem to be made to work with each other and ask your-
self this: “If these parts did indeed work together, what problem would they 
illustrate?”

Among the wide array of parts you might use, some may help you emu-
late an organization, some may help you give form to your design, and still 
others may be “technological.” If you do not think of yourself as a technolo-
gist, an artist, or a manager, you may have to overcome some fear. But the 
good news is that you don’t need to know anything technical about the part; 
you need only use it—just as you don’t have to know how your microwave 
oven works to warm up a meal.

108 

CHAPTER 3

At first, you may just follow some instructions. As you flesh out your 
problem, it will become clearer whether you need to modify or develop new 
technologies, what they ought to do, and where to search for any expertise 
you might need.

At first, everything you may obtain is an auxiliary part: Parts extend your 
power over nature so you can demonstrate a problem tangibly. This ought to 
help you overcome the self-awareness that comes from not knowing whether 
your idea is the one. That is, the purpose of parts is not to shape a product, 
but to help you think about the problem tangibly. There is no need to worry 
at this stage whether your final “gizmo” will include any variant of the parts 
you choose early on. That’s true even if you came up with ideas for parts 
while thinking about a product.

This principle allows you to focus your search on what you have or what 
you might easily obtain. It also allows you to formulate follow-on questions 
about every part: “Now that I know how to do this, what else might I use this 
for? What else might I be able to use this with?”

Parts are meant for your own demonstration purposes. No need to worry 
just yet about what might go into the solution. The parts you choose will 
either extend your power over nature (that’s how William Barton Rogers 
defined technology) or help you simulate something about how the problem 
you imagine connects with what actual people do (i.e., how it extends their 
power over nature). Either you’ll have these parts already or you’ll have to 
acquire them. The table below gives you some ideas.

It’s easier to presume you’re wrong and figure out 

why than agonize over being right.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

109

How parts extend your power over nature
 
You already 
have it (“What 
can I use that 
for?”)

Exists
Whatever you or your 
organization currently owns  
or routinely produces or 
procures for a different 
purpose.

Something you can procure  
at a price that doesn’t make 
you think twice.

You need to 
acquire it 
(“What do I 
need to do 
that?”

Can be emulated
Something tangible with which to emulate 
something else that is beyond your current 
resources; or a task such as a workflow or 
dynamic already used by some department or 
group within your organization.

A design or model that explains how you  
would go about creating a workflow, dynamic, 
or aspect of an organization (e.g., certain kinds 
of legal documents, a “dry-run” process, the 
specification of a type of test required by 
regulation.)

Everything already in your possession is accessible, and hence could be used 
as parts. Ask yourself this: “What might I be able to use that for?” Don’t ask 
whether something is a “good” part. This approach is particularly valuable if 
you are working inside an organization and your desire to innovate comes up 
against boundaries imposed by existing activities or products.

What you don’t already own but need is probably easy to obtain at little or 
no cost. The alternative is to accept that what you need is beyond your resources. 
This may seem counterintuitive, but the alternative principle would lead you 
to end everything before you even start. The Web can be to you what the 
photography catalogue was to Dr. Maiman. For innovation prototyping, you 
have access to an amazing array of resources online. With the meaning of 
“part”  defined  broadly—whatever  you  can  bring  together  at  table  scale  to  
illustrate something about your problem—all those resources can be parts for 
you.

Parts help you glean what might go wrong at the next scale. As you assem-
ble parts not originally conceived to work together, you have an opportunity 
to become at once constructivist and skeptical. Your constructivist self finds 
and  assembles  the  parts  to  work  together.  Your  skeptical  self  doubts  the 
whole will even work.

110 

CHAPTER 3

Innovating With What You Already Have  

in a Corporate Setting

If you are innovating within a company, you may wonder whether the 
process  is  the  same.  In  principle,  everything  you  already  have  is  an 
accessible part. In your case, this may include what your company already 
does,  produces,  and/or  procures.  And  it  includes  everything  routinely 
brought together to make your company’s product(s) or service(s) real in 
the hands of its beneficiaries (whether consumers or other businesses).

This may help you relax the tension that may come from feeling the 
need  to  leverage  your  firm’s  core  competencies  while  innovating—
something that seems to be one of the largest hurdles to innovating in a 
corporate setting. It frees you up to think about them broadly: For the 
purpose of innovating, your core competencies are not limited to what 
makes your current offerings good, but include everything your company 
has built over years to serve those offerings effectively—as long as you can 
imagine how to repurpose them.

For instance, if you think of your core competency as building cars, 
you  may  be  compelled  to  innovate  on  your  production  process  or  on 
features of the car product. But you could also think differently about 
everything  involved  in  building  your  cars:  expertise,  know-how, 
regulations, functional departments such as finance, inventory manage-
ment,  procurement,  and  legal,  and  so  on.  Following  the  logic  of  this 
chapter,  you  may  inspire  and  make  tangible  a  new  purpose  for  your 
innovating by thinking how these components of your firm might help 
you—as parts—in simulating something entirely new.

By  viewing  as  potentially  repurposed  parts  everything  you  already 
produce,  procure,  and  do  as  an  organization,  you  allow  yourself  to 
innovate without constraints. You may leverage what you have and still 
innovate inside or outside your company’s current offerings.

This is how an established company can behave like a startup.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

111

Innovating with Existing Scientific and  

Technological Knowledge

When it comes to innovation, individuals may feel constrained by their 
education  in  a  particular  discipline  in  the  same  way  corporations  are 
constrained by their core competencies. This can be especially acute for 
individuals with advanced degrees in a specific research field. But it doesn’t 
have to be that way.

Education—in  science  and  technology  or,  for  that  matter,  in  any 
discipline—is a powerful tool for the purpose of innovating, and is most 
powerful when you abandon the idea that you are constrained to a specific 
area of knowledge. Any constraint is actually your own doing. Education 
increases the depth and breadth of your thinking, equips you with new 
skills, opens your mind to new vantage points, and increases your literacy 
in a multitude of disciplines. Give your education a chance, and it will be 
the source of the ingenuity you need to make a problem tangible.

With  that  in  mind,  every  paper  or  patent—even  those  not  in  your 
particular  discipline—could  be  a  part.  So,  too,  could  your  technical 
training. With papers, it’s a matter of seeing them for their underlying 
promise of offering you a means to reproduce something about nature, 
the world, a machine that we now know is possible—that is, a new “truth.” 
You can use the claims and specification of patents in much the same way, 
but need to pay extra attention to how a patent potentially constrains 
your freedom to operate.

You may wonder what you might be able to do now that someone else 
has figured out that new “truth.” You may find an entire paper useful, or 
only a subset of what the paper says. Perhaps what’s useful is something 
the paper helped you think about (an adjacency). You may wonder what 
else  might  be  possible,  or  what  might  result  from  combining  what  is 
reported in multiple papers (or patents).

You use all this to demonstrate that an aspect of your problem is also 
possible. And if your technical education taught you anything, you know 
it is for nature, not you, to decide whether something is actually possible. 
Your job is to come up with a way to pose the question to nature or come 
up with a contraption that might help nature give the answer you desire.

112 

CHAPTER 3

As you reason how to make the best use of a paper’s contents, you’ll 
address how to make it easy to experiment with that knowledge. You’ll 
also likely have to figure out other material parts with which to reproduce 
what you need from that paper at the scale your current resources permit.

In my experience, it takes about as long to create a cursory demonstration 
using parts technology parts to guide your thinking in this way as it takes to 
produce a PowerPoint presentation. Over two weeks, working part time, the 
daring participants in my workshops cycle through five or six innovation 
prototypes—reaching out to people at the same time—and about ten vari-
ants of a problem. In most cases, getting the first demonstration going may 
be as easy as willingly following some online instructions.

As  you  progress  through  scale,  the  meaning  of  what’s  accessible  will 
change, and so will the magnitude and impact of what you seek to demon-
strate. But these principles will apply all the same. They can help you imple-
ment the basic principle with which I opened the chapter: You want to learn 
a vastly disproportionate, indeed unreasonable, amount with the money you 
have now, rather than postponing learning for when you have more money.

Parts scale problems down

Your first innovation prototype, like those of my examples in chapter 1, will 
be indistinguishable from the starting point of any “failed” company. I am 
asking you to resist the temptation to search for the “innovation” in the pro-
totype, and to instead allow that search to unfold. This implies that the value 
of your prototypes lies in what it demonstrates is possible. This perspective is 
absent from most recipes that conflate innovation and product.

Your job is to layer proof of concept upon proof of concept as you scale 
up. What you have at every stage is but a demonstration of what you will be 
able to accomplish as your organization grows in the way you envision it 

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

113

growing. It is also a demonstration of everything you now know you will be 
able to accomplish as you scale up resources to the next level. So, as you em-
bark on your innovating, you are better off thinking about what, if proven 
true, will best demonstrate that the next step is possible.

proof of concept 

Your job is to layer 

How do you do that? It begins with choosing what you need to make 
tangible and putting some parts to-
gether. You choose the aspects of the 
problem you need to make tangible 
by being honest with yourself. Of all 
the things that can go wrong, which 
would make you stop wanting to be 
“investor zero”? Which demonstrate 
best what might be accomplished at 
the  larger  scale?  You  choose  the 
parts  that  allow  you  to  experiment 
more effectively at the scale that cor-
responds to your current resources.

upon proof of 

concept as you  

scale up.

The  mind-set  is  somewhat  the 
opposite of what you may have come 
to  expect  from  the  “glamour”  that 
typically surrounds “entrepreneurship” and “innovation.” The problem that 
gives you purpose is enticing, but it likely is poorly formulated. You want to 
prove it all wrong. You want to learn what makes it wrong. You want to give 
yourself an opportunity to try and err so you can determine whether there is 
a variant to your problem worth pursuing—one that makes it right.

Working with parts as I propose in this chapter helps you get to those 
answers faster and for less money. Parts are not there to help you build a 
product you imagine, but to help you imagine a problem solved and what a 
solution would need to do by focusing on that real-world problem at scale.

114 

CHAPTER 3

It is not about glamour. The problem that gives you 

purpose is enticing, but likely poorly formulated. 

You want to learn what makes it wrong.

Examples of Technical Parts that  

Represent a Larger Reality

If you’ve never worked with a microcontroller (or a bare-bones computer), 
it may sound intimidating. To me, they are an auxiliary part with which to 
simulate  anything  that  needs  some  degree  of  choreography  among 
different  parts  (sensors,  actuators,  small  motors,  or  whatever  else  you 
hook to it).

You don’t actually need to understand how a microcontroller or bare 
bones  computer  works  to  use  one.  There  are  myriad  projects  online 
through which to train yourself on how to use them as parts. A simple 
Google search will return how to add a Tesla-like screen to your car, for 
instance, or equip your Volkswagen van as a weather control station that 
can  guide  you  to  where  the  wind  is  best  for  surfing.  Your  “training” 
needn’t  take  longer  than  a  weekend.  I’ve  gotten  people  trained  to  use 
microcontrollers as a tool to inform their problems in about two hours.

You  could  certainly  use  a  microcontroller  as  a  component  in  any 
electronic gizmo (if that’s where your hunch is leading), but there is so 
much more to a microcontroller. For instance, you can very easily use a 
microcontroller to turn light bulbs on and off and thus simulate demand 
in a table-scale simulation of an electrical grid. A microcontroller or a 
bare-bones  computer  might  allow  you  to  simulate  an  application  that 
requires a large degree of coordination of other components. (CreepyDOL 
did something similar.)

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

115

Further, at the scale of a table, a large control room is indistinguishable 
from a microcontroller. You could use microcontrollers to simulate the 
effect you want from some mechanical controls. A microcontroller might 
even allow you to simulate tangibly some of the non-tangible aspects of 
your problem—distribution, time delays, and so on. Visual artists even 
use them to add motion to their works or enable interaction.

You can get a microcontroller (e.g., Arduino) or a bare-bones computer 
(e.g., a Raspberry Pi or the equivalent) delivered to your doorstep in two 
days for less than $50.

Another  example  of  a  multipurpose  tangible  part—a  microfluidics 
kit—costs about $1,000 and can be delivered in a week. Essentially a set of 
small  pipes,  it’s  what  you  would  use  for  all  manner  of  lab-on-a-chip 
applications. And to some degree, it may be a first means to simulate what 
needs to happen in a larger system of pipes, or a way to use very small 
amounts of expensive reagents to test an idea. Conversely, you may also be 
able to simulate the piping with tubing you can get at any hardware store.
Although microcontrollers and microfluidics may ultimately be part 
of a solution, here I am inviting you to think about them as elements that 
allow you to emulate something else. It could be a control room, or the 
piping in your future manufacturing plant.

Taken further, you may also be able to simulate an entire biosafety lab 
in a box, and then make a business of selling field-ready biosafety labs. It 
may take nothing more than thinking through what needs containment 
and assessing whether the container, instead of being a room, could be a 
specially constructed box that achieves the same or even a higher standard 
of safety.

Placing a constraint on the scale at which you make your idea tangible 
forces you to pay attention to the problem. Using readily available parts is a 
way to scale problems down. Scaling problems down to table scale not only 
allows you to assemble parts more quickly, but also lets you bring problems 
down to human size rather than system size—where the need for statistics 
may make it hard to separate symptoms from root causes, if not confuse the 
problem altogether.

116 

CHAPTER 3

There  are  many  benefits  to 
thinking of parts as a means to scale 
a problem. It creates a concrete task. 
It  makes  it  easier  to  see  what  is 
wrong,  because  at  that  scale  what’s 
wrong is also concrete, and because 
whatever can’t be made tangible ei-
ther is still too abstract or can be ex-
plained better as part of a scale-up 
sequence.

Scaling a problem 

with parts creates 

a concrete task and 

makes it easier to see 

what is wrong.

Conversely, the biggest “risk” to innovating is setting your inquiry in a 
way that makes being wrong unaffordable. Allowing yourself to be wrong is 
important because that’s an important way in which you learn, but also be-
cause you are going to be wrong a lot before you find a path to being right. As 
a matter of fact, you need only be approximately right once: when you are 
getting ready to go into production.

We use the same kinds of curves to describe changes in knowledge and changes in adoption (as 
well as phase changes, etc.). In physics, whatever happens in the flat region of a curve may be 
causing the phase transition, but progress there cannot be measured using the same observable 
we use to capture the phase transition. In other words, adoption is caused by something that 
cannot be measured by adoption.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

117

Your biggest “risk” is setting on a path that makes 

being wrong unaffordable.

Being wrong is definitely easier to handle when the impact of your being 
wrong is commensurate with how much there is to lose. The mind-set of lay-
ering proofs of concept as a means to approach scale gives you that by con-
struction: If you’ve focused your proofs of concept on being wrong about the 
things that will make your idea senseless at the next scales, being wrong is af-
fordable and possibly beneficial. And this all begins at table scale.

In the end, all I am asking you to do is try to assemble some parts together—
some may be technical and others not—in a new way for the purpose of clari-
fying a problem to yourself. I call that scaling the problem down.

Eventually, a few scale ramp-ups later, you may produce an innovation 
because  others—unaware  of  the  parts  you’ve  put  together—adopt  for  use 
whatever it is you conceived and derives some benefit from doing so. And that 
justifies their calling what you did an “innovation,” even if you and I know the 
innovation came not from the product per se but from how you brought the 
parts together. Remember, what made Ford’s Model T an innovation was that 
it was “affordable,” not that Ford had invented the car—the automobile al-
ready existed. Affordability had as much to do with the car as it had to do with 
the assembly line, the financing strategy, and raising wages—all parts.

Parts will tell you all you need assume. They will tell you what you may 
need help with, and in doing so they will supercharge your imagination. Once 
put together, the parts illustrate the problem, the scale, or the verification. 
That prepares you to discover where the opportunity for impact lies and how 
to ramp up through scale.

And again, all along the way, nothing prevents you from using mostly 

parts you already have.

118 

CHAPTER 3

Takeaways

•  You can get started right away. Assemble some parts you either already 
have or can easily get. Acquire knowledge as you go. Use parts to make your 
problem tangible. A part is good if it allows you to demonstrate a function or 
an aspect of your problem.
•  Anything to which you already have access may be a part. If you are inno-
vating in a corporate setting, this includes everything you currently do, as-
semble, or procure. For everything else, there’s the Web, where you can find 
all sorts of inexpensive parts with which to emulate even the more non-tan-
gible aspects of your prototype: from the technical to all sorts of services and 
products you may use to address legal, organizational, and manufacturing 
aspects of your problem. There is also a wealth of available resources online 
for acquiring knowledge you’ll need.
•  As you bring parts together, questions such as “What else might I use it for 
or with?” and “What if these parts worked together?” and “What problem 
would they illustrate?” help you more than asking whether something is a 
part and whether it’s “good.”
•  Choose parts so you can reason about your problem with your mind and 
your hands. Choose parts to make any aspect of your problem tangible—
even a solution. Think about parts as elements in a conversation you are hav-
ing with your problem. Parts respond when you ask:

What makes this hunch so special?
What could go wrong? What do I have to do to show that it is wrong?
What do I have already that I can use to demonstrate what my hunch 
may be missing?

•  As you assemble parts, they’ll tell you what you need to assume at the  
current scale, what you aren’t seeing, what you are missing, and whether the 
next scale is even possible.

 

INTERACTING WITH PARTS 

119

     4
4

interfacing with people     

You will need to interface with people as you innovate. People will influence 
the direction your innovating takes. Who those people ought to be and what 
roles they may play cannot possibly be known until they begin to influence 
the problem you’re solving. This has elements of a Catch-22.

There are two common ways around this catch. One is to decide on the 
people and solve for the innovation—as designers often do. Another is to fix 
in advance what your innovation will be, get a team, and solve for the market 
(which is people)—which is what marketers would have you do. I propose a 
third: Focus on the problem and solve for people’s contributions in the form 
of information, capabilities, and skills.

In the third approach, people are as much a variable in your innovating as 
are parts. Nothing is fixed. Your eventual innovation is as much an assembly 
of parts as it is an assembly of people, and your deliberate interactions with 
other people will shape your innovation as much as putting parts together 
will.  In  fact,  just  about  everything  about  parts  in  chapter  3  applies  to 

people—even though people are not parts. For instance, as you innovate, 
some parts stay, some parts go, some parts inform the next step, and all parts 
inform the problem, helping you to make it more and more tangible. Like-
wise with people: As you innovate, people will come and go in the same way, 
providing information you need or skills you may be lacking. Some people 
will inform the next step of your innovating.

All the people with whom you interact will inform the problem, helping 

you make it more and more tangible.

Parts help you understand how your problem functions, and inform fea-
sibility and how to scale up. But there is absolutely nothing in parts you put 
together in a gizmo that can inform what only people can inform: impact. 
Specifically, people can help you understand how and why to bring parts to-
gether  for  impact,  and  the  scale  you  need  to  attain  to  make  that  impact 
tangible.

Sooner or later, it will become clear to you that you need people. There 
is a tendency to jump way ahead and think you need to design for users or 
acquire some board members, or a business partner, or a technical guy—even 
when you haven’t yet created an organization. That’s backward thinking—
often confused with “working backwards” from the objective. Better to focus 
on getting the information and skills you need at a given moment, without 
worrying about whether someone is going to stick around to serve on some 
kind of board that may not even be relevant today. To be sure, there may well 
be a team, partners, users, advisors, buyers, distributors, markets, and board 
members along your future path. But setting such roles in stone is a far cry 
from pulling people together for information and skills at this earlier stage. 
Besides, teams rarely come pre-assembled, which is why the notion “Get an 
idea and get a team” mires you in hindsight thinking.

Talk First, Count Later

We fall in love with an idea. We love it as a machine. We love it for its 
æsthetics. We persuade ourselves that every challenge to adoption can be 

124 

CHAPTER 4

assumed  away,  rationalized  into  oblivion,  or  rejected  outright  because 
“they” just don’t get it. Soon enough, there is no one left who cares or even 
understands why you are so wrapped up with your little pet project. This 
is the same kind of problem as having a basement without an egress. You 
ought to be able to do something about it.

How? Let me begin with an admittedly ridiculous example: Suppose 
you want to know whether a beverage that is across the room is cold. You 
would most likely not sit there reasoning your way into a temperature 
figure. Brainstorming with colleagues will get you only so far. Chances are 
you will not bury yourself in arcane temperature research reports. You 
may even dissuade yourself from Googling your way to an answer for the 
average beverage someone else claims to have measured on a whim, or 
some other statistic. Instead, you will probably walk across the room and 
measure  the  beverage’s  temperature  yourself.  Whether  you  use  a 
thermometer, use your finger, or take a sip is a matter of style, the precision 
you require, the purpose of the measurement, and your tolerance for risk.
Something similar is true of conversations. The information you need 
resides in people, not in a head count or some other statistic. The finest 
statistics are things like up-to-the-minute sales reports or final election 
results.  By  the  time  such  statistics  are  available  to  you,  you  will  have 
advanced so far in your endeavor that you will dismiss all other input.

If ultimate statistics are not an option available to you, then you have a 
trade-off to explore: You may seek proxy statistics and find comfort in 
numbers, or you can walk across the room and just start talking to people 
about  what  they’re  doing.  What  you  really  need  to  understand  is  the 
structure  of  the  space  you  are  thinking  of  getting  into—and  that 
understanding comes from people. You could still conduct a survey to 
compile statistics from those people, but that’s one of the most inefficient 
ways of reaching the kind of understanding you need considering all the 
uncertainties at this point.

You  can  get  closer  to  that  understanding  through  a  conversation—
with an industry expert, a potential user, or just about anyone who might 
have something useful to say. It turns out that a conversation is a way out 
of this particular “basement without an egress.” Later, you can decorate 
what you’ve learned with statistics, narrow as they may be, that shine light 
on the critical aspects of your idea.

In other words: Talk first, count later.

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

125

People come and go as you innovate, providing 

information or skills you may lack. Your 

eventual innovation is an assembly of people.

As if one Catch-22 were not enough, it turns out there is another caveat: 
The people who will ultimately adopt the outcomes of your innovating do 
not yet exist. Sure, those individuals may be living, but they aren’t yet the 
people they will be when the time comes for them to derive a benefit from 
your innovating.

It takes a non-insignificant amount of time, often years, for an innova-
tion to emerge and to be adopted. A lot can happen in that time. The people 
you interact with may mature new ideas, and you have a role to play in that. 
Consider smartphones, which were but a niche product in the mid-1990s 
and a far cry from the mini-computers and lucrative platform for the app 
business they are today. If you had told your grandfather back in the early 
1990s to hold on because you wanted to take a picture with your phone, pe-
riod handset in hand, you would have been dismissed as crazy for merely 
suggesting such an idea. “There’s something wrong with that kid,” your grand-
father might have said.

Now consider the problem that gives you purpose. From the previous 

example, it follows that—today—you are wrong.

As you scale up, you need a way to interface meaningfully with people 
despite knowing that they cannot possibly deliver the straightforward an-
swers  that  would  turn  your  innovating  into  a  mere  exercise  in  template 
matching or a wholly user-centric design. There are several things you need 
to learn from interfacing with people, not the least of which is the organiza-
tional model that will facilitate that scale-up—that is, the way the people 
who  join  you  will  work  together  within  an  organization  that  has  yet  to 

126 

CHAPTER 4

emerge. Please note that merely founding a company, a non-profit, or some 
other kind of entity does not an organization make. A company is a vessel 
that, absent some organizational principles, does not move. The converse is 
also true: An organization alone is nothing more than a bundle of organizing 
principles.

As they mature, innovation prototypes accrue people incrementally. The 
degree to which these people continue to share an interest in the project de-
termines their roles, how long they play them, and the depth of their interac-
tions with the project. These interactions will influence and possibly change 
the problem you are solving.

So, how do you work with this variable, people? How do you deliberately 
or serendipitously attract them to your innovating, use what they have to of-
fer, and move them in and out of appropriate roles, understanding that as 
with parts, people will come and go?

Essentially, these people will fall into one of the following categories.
People may have information you need. This information may be about 
something in your prototype, such as one of the uncertainties or unknowns 
you had set aside for later (as discussed in chapter 2). It may be about parts—
say, the parts that simulate distribution. Or it may be about other people to 
whom you need to reach out, such as experts or potential users.

People may have skills you need, generally dictated by the parts of your 
prototype. For instance, you may lack the skills to work with the environ-
mental regulations (a part) for your distrib-
uted  chemical  manufacturing  idea,  and  so 
some help from an attorney and perhaps the 
right kind of engineer may be in order. People 
from  whom  you  acquire  information  may 
also help identify skills you might need.

encounters may 

Serendipitous 

People  who  have  information  and/or 
skills  may,  at  a  later  point,  become  con-
tractors,  consultants,  advisors,  core  team  
members, and play other roles in the organi-
zation that is emerging as you scale up your 

yield information, 

skills, or money  

you need.

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

127

prototype. For now, though, all you can really assess is their knowledge, capa-
bilities, and skills. Any longer-term relationship will hinge on that.

People may have money you need, too. At a later point, they may become 
users, investors, partners, buyers, and so on. As I discuss in more detail in 
chapter 8, we tend to look for the money first, or at least far earlier than is 
necessary, which is very disruptive of innovating. In fact, time spent search-
ing  for  money  could  almost  certainly  be  spent  more  productively  doing 
something else—and for that too, there is a way to view your fundraising as 
an incremental step for which you’ve been naturally preparing through your 
interactions with people.

The  way  these  people  affect  and  perhaps  even  fundamentally  change 
your innovating determines the roles they may play in the future. You’ll seek 
them out for specific roles based on how they’ve affected your innovation 
prototype. As an operating principle, you want to work with people who 
routinely broaden your understanding of what you’re doing and help you 
reach beyond where you’re at to get more people and information—no mat-
ter their possible future role.

As you scale up, and more and more people are involved in a circle of 
ever-changing relationships, you may reach a point where some of the people 
gel. That’s when future roles become clearer: core team members, advisory 
board members, financial advisors, whatever. You select people because they 
have  what  you  need  to  push  things  forward.  And  you  understand  what’s 
needed to push things forward because you’ve understood that from your 
interactions. They—the people and their interactions—become an organi-
zation, which early on you may call the team.

This effectively allows you to view both organization and team as emerg-
ing  from  your  prototyping  and  scale-up.  And,  as  with  parts—that  is,  the 
non-people tangible aspects of your innovating—non-linearities play to your 
advantage: At a sufficiently small scale, every one new person (an incremen-
tal change) may fundamentally change the destination of your innovating (a 
disruptive change).

A team, thus, is a construct that evolves as you engage in the activity of 
reaching  out  to  people  for  a  variety  of  things.  And  there  is  something 

128 

CHAPTER 4

interesting to note about the emergence of a team compared with going out 
to look for money: As you build this circle of people that strengthens your 
innovation  prototype,  you  are  in  effect  assembling  a  community  around 
your future innovation. Indeed, money may come to you from people who 
want to “buy in” to your innovating. They’ve all been exposed to your inno-
vation prototype—directly or by referral—through your quest for informa-
tion or skills or, more generally, advice.

Some may want to “buy” a portion of your scale-up and hence a role as an 
investors. Others may want to buy a version of what you’re actually creating; 
these may be the “lead users” spoken of in business parlance. Still others may 
buy a portion of your innovation prototype and stay on as partners.

There is yet another category of money that does not come to you so 
much as you go to it. Investments from venture capitalists, angel investors, 
private equity folks, and others may come to you as a result of your quest for 
information, skills, and advice. In chapter 8, I discuss how you can come to 
view it as a natural extension of your inquiry.

Finding people

How do you find people? Consider information. You are, like everyone else, 
already a part of many communities. One or more of those communities has 
likely given you information already that led you to develop the problem you 
think you can solve—that is, that led to your hunch. From wherever you 
start, reaching people means reaching beyond the community or communi-
ties in which you developed the hunch. You are not a community monoga-
mist. Your life is a bunch of ever-expanding circles and communities. The 
obvious way to begin to reach beyond is by communicating with the people 
you already know. You may choose people to communicate with based on 
the kind of information you believe you need, or whether you trust that they 
will tell you outright why they think you are wrong (if they do). What you 
need is going to change as a result of having those conversations.

That covers at least the set of people you can imagine have information 
you  now  know  you  need.  You  can  do  all  this  through  your  social  media 

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

129

connections, targeting specific interest groups that are particularly aligned 
with your purpose, or through “cold calls” to thought leaders and other tar-
geted individuals—to name just a few.

However, at a sufficiently small scale, the merits of being highly strategic 
about your inquiries are at best dubious. You have a hunch. You have more 
questions than answers. Most likely, one question is more pressing than oth-
ers, such as: “Do you know who knows something about … ?” That’s a ques-
tion that might be answered by people you know.

That leads me to the other set of people: the ones you meet serendipi-
tously and who volunteer information about what they do that ends up be-
ing valuable to you. This is all about chance encounters. It turns out that the 
people who move in your same circles have more going on than the limited 
“personas” you may attach to them. They have more dimensions, and they 
are part of multiple other communities of which you may not be aware. So, 
in addition to all the “profiling” you may do to figure out who you know al-
ready that can help you, you can also make it your business to engage actively 
(and in person) with people without any other agenda than to allow yourself 
to be surprised.

I am encouraging you to participate in social groups, to attend events, 
and to open yourself up to casual conversations while the after-event cock-
tails are served, even when the event does not seem to be directly related to 
your innovating. Without asking, there is no way to tell whether the person 
standing next to you at the member event at the museum knows something 
you don’t but should. You just need to be ready to listen and have a casual 
description ready when your turn comes to answer the “What are you up 
to?” question.

Chance encounters are valuable. Until proven 

otherwise, everyone you speak with is a potential 

expert.

130 

CHAPTER 4

Chance Encounters

When  it  comes  to  finding  people,  you  can  go  either  way:  you  either 
assume you already know the kinds of people you need to meet and talk 
to, or you take for granted that you do not really know what you are doing 
and assume that every encounter with other people stands to make you 
smarter. Opening yourself up to chance encounters may seem obvious, 
but doing so has become anathema in how entrepreneurship is typically 
taught. Instead, the focus is on creating the ideal list of people you should 
talk to. That takes up so much time that chance encounters—and their 
value—become an afterthought at best.

Driven  as  you  are  to  arrive  at  the  destination  you  envision,  it  is 
incredibly  easy  to  limit  yourself  to  interactions  with  people  and  in 
communities that are directly related to your mission in some obvious 
way. Indeed, you meet people by participating in events that interest you 
and them. However, no one (with the possible exception, by omission, of 
textbooks  on  marketing  personas  and  the  aforementioned  entrepre-
neurship courses) ever said that you can’t find a person relevant to your 
inquiry at an event that has nothing to do with your mission. At an opera 
performance you may come across someone who knows nothing about 
your  problem  but  knows  someone  who  does.  Much  the  same  could 
happen at a museum opening, at a dinner at a friend’s house, at an event at 
your child’s school, or at an airport where you find yourself stranded by 
inclement weather. In fact, you can meet people relevant to your inquiry 
anywhere.

At the risk of stating the obvious, all it takes is having a conversation 
that begins with a casual “Hello,” asking people what they do, and having 
genuine interest in the answer. When your turn comes to answer the same 
question, you need only offer a casual description of what you do and 
what you are after. Humans are reasonably good at conversing—better 
than they are at answering questionnaires.

Indeed,  limiting  yourself  to  just  the  obvious  interest  group  and  the 
personas you profile sounds as boring and narrow-minded as confining 
yourself to the basement portrayed in so many entrepreneurship books.
For some extra motivation, here are some notable examples of sig-

nificant casual encounters:

•  Sergey Brin and Larry Page, the founders of Google, met when 
Page visited Stanford University as a prospective student.

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

131

•  Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak, the co-founders of Apple, were 
introduced to each other by a neighbor.*
•  Bill Hewlett and David Packard, whose giant technology 
company originated in a Palo Alto garage, reportedly met when 
they both joined Stanford’s football team as freshmen.**
•  It was at a family dinner that a guest speaker in my class figured 
out that he ought to introduce his new technology to an industry 
he had initially dismissed. A long-time family friend who worked 
in that industry happened to be at the table and told him he was 
wrong. The company was sold two years later for nearly $100 
million.

The lesson here is that the person who can give you good advice and 
perhaps even join you in your adventure is someone you’ve already met or 
someone with whom you may have a chance encounter at an event at best 
tangentially  related  to  the  problem  that  gives  you  purpose.  The 
serendipitous nature of this comes as a relief. After all, with nothing but a 
highly volatile hunch to go on, finding the perfect event to attend might 
be next to impossible.

 *See  Jason  Hiner,  “Apple’s  first  employee:  The  remarkable  odyssey  of  Bill  Fernandez,” 
TechRepublic, September 2015.

 **Ed  Sharpe,    “Hewlett-Packard,  The  Early  Years,”  www.smecc.org/hewlett-packard,_the_
early_years.htm.

In your ambition to scale up, you may feel some urgency to make gener-
alizations about the people you meet as you listen to what they say. But resist 
the temptation to categorize them as some archetype you think you need. 
Instead, see them as the individuals they are and open yourself to learning 
from the unique information they may provide.

Put another way, these are genuine people you are talking to, not instanc-
es of a distribution. Your purpose is not to figure out now what scale looks 
like in terms of number of people, but to figure out something from indi-
viduals’ experiences and the specific information they may provide that will 

132 

CHAPTER 4

improve your hunch, refine your problem, and help you reconceive what you 
prototype for impact.

You need to gauge impact, and you can only do that with people. Your 
prototype needs to speak to something that actual people will do for their 
own benefit. It ought to be possible to relate what you propose doing to how 
other people have gone about solving problems you find to be similar. To 
understand impact, you need to engage with people. In my experience, most 
individuals respond best to conversations and to decisions, and are notori-
ously bad at judging ideas on the spot, brainstorming about hypotheticals, or 
identifying what they may need several years from now. To be productively 
wrong you need the input of others, and your interests are not well served if 
both you and your counterpart are guessing.

Fear and Data

When it comes to factoring impact into your innovating, we often fear 
getting  tangible  too  quickly.  In  truth,  though,  the  “fear”  is  lack  of 
knowledge—just  as  with  parts.  The  response  to  that “fear”  is  often  to 
rush to Google seeking immediate relief in some figures quickly pulled 
together.

Few of us realize that those figures are as theoretical a prototype of 

impact as is any imaginary product.

If looking for relief in numbers is the entire process, you will arrive at 
an existing market and the “innovation” is likely to be a copy. There is 
nothing inherently bad about a copy, but producing a copy may not be 
what the innovators originally set out to do.

Lack  of  knowledge  creates  uncertainty,  and  numbers  alone  do  not 
reduce  uncertainty.  Numbers  are  nothing  more  than  what  we  use  to 
communicate some kinds of easily compressible data. Those data and the 
inferences you draw from them can reduce uncertainty. I am not proposing 
that you shy away from numbers; just remember that the tangible story 
around those numbers is what truly matters.

In the case of impact, what is tangible stems from what you learn from 

conversations with people, not from how many conversations you have.

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

133

All you need to do is prepare your innovation prototype to inform a ca-

sual conversation.

Conversing with people

As you go about innovating, there is no need for you to adopt some affected 
mode of conversation. In encounters with other people, chance or planned, 
it’s quite common that sooner or later an opportunity will present itself to 
discuss what each of you is working on. That’s an invitation to learn. Wheth-
er you’re having an informal conversation with a stranger or with a noted 
opinion leader, you should feel free to ask directly about what your conversa-
tion partner does, about a piece of research, or something about his or her 
job. Until proven otherwise, everyone you speak with is a potential expert.

You learn through the interaction, not through matching the individual 
to some kind of template or surveying them with a standard questionnaire. 
And if during a conversation you find yourself wondering “Is now the time 
for the questionnaire?” the answer is No. In fact it is never time for the stan-
dard questionnaire. Questionnaires and surveys do serve a purpose, but they 
yield nothing like the information you may obtain through conversation. (I 
touch on the topic of questionnaires in chapter 12.)

As you converse, ask questions that go with the flow of the conversation 
and that help give you a detailed understanding of what your counterpart is 
talking about: “What made you think of doing that?” “When did you start?” 
“How many people did it take?” “Who did you have to find to help?” “Where 
did you find them?” “How did you go about [this or that]?” “What kinds of 

Prepare your innovation prototype to inform a 

casual conversation. You don’t have to share your 

complete idea.

134 

CHAPTER 4

difficulties  did  you  encounter?”  “Why  do  you  think  it  worked,  or  didn’t 
work?” “How did you pay for it?”

Be mindful that questions such as “How much would you pay for a such 
and such with these bells and so whistles?”—that is, questions aimed at gar-
nering quantifiable evidence—usually draw rather uninformative answers. If 
you really need a figure, I advise that you follow the teachings of the Hitch-
hiker’s Guide to the Galaxy and use 42 (“the Answer to the Ultimate Ques-
tion of Life, the Universe, and Everything”1) and then focus your efforts on 
finding out what the units ought to be until you know what you really need 
to know.

Leave figuring out how the experience of the person you talked to is rel-
evant to your own innovating for later. First you need to understand his or 
her experience. Resist every temptation to seek approval for your idea. That 
is not the conversation’s purpose. If you detect some parallelism with your 
idea, turn it into a question about your counterpart’s experience, not about 
your problem.

When your turn comes to explain what you are up to, use what you have 
learned. You learned it as you worked to make your own inquiry tangible. 
Discuss specifics. Remember, though, that this is a conversation, not an op-
portunity to spill your guts with a half-baked “elevator pitch.”

You have a problem you envision solving, you have a cursory idea of im-
pact, and there is something tangible you are specifically doing. Talk about 
all  that.  There  likely  is  something  very  specific  you  need  to  know  at  this 
point—your  uncertainties  and  unknowns—that  you  can  bring  up  in  the 
conversation, because your counterpart may know someone who can help. A 
friend of mine once told me that in the early 1990s, when she was starting her 
company, she asked all the people she met whether they knew anyone who 
worked as what we today call a software engineer.

At some point in your conversation, you may begin to worry that you’re 
sharing too much about your idea. That issue always comes up in classroom 
discussions. It’s true that what we don’t share can’t generally be copied, but 

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

135

it’s also true that what we don’t share cannot elicit a response. So, there is a 
trade-off to explore.

You don’t have to share your complete idea. There are ways to present 
what you are working on with details removed or through an example. It is to 
your  advantage  if  these  conversations  are  easier  to  have,  and  that  can  be 
helped along by an analogy or a “near miss.”

Near Misses

I am using the term “near miss” in a constructivist way, rather than in the 
catastrophe-averting sense in which you may be accustomed to hearing it. 
The inspiration for this use comes from the work on artificial intelligence 
of MIT’s Patrick Henry Winston.*

A near miss can be the conversational analogue of using a strawberry in 
lieu of a bacterium. For instance, you may be interested in using bitcoins 
to set up a payment-clearance service. That might be hard to explain to 
your conversational counterparts but easy for them to copy. A near miss 
in  your  conversation  might  be  to  use  Square  or  Apple  Pay  or  Google 
Wallet as an example.

  *See,  for  example,  Patrick  Henry  Winston,  “Learning  Structural  Descriptions  from 
Examples,” Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1970. A shortened version 
is in Patrick Henry Winston (ed.), The Psychology of Computer Vision, McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, 1975.

You stand to get better responses if, instead of explaining how everything 

will work, you focus on what you think you want to accomplish.

Being wrong; prototyping impact

You can only hope the people you converse with will tell you that you’re 
wrong, because a veritable treasure trove of information may lie behind such 

136 

CHAPTER 4

a statement. Near misses—in which you are “wrong” by default—will prob-
ably help get there.

Just because you are told you are wrong, though, you shouldn’t necessar-

ily believe everything others say.

Once you have all this information from other people, there is the ques-
tion of how you incorporate it into your thinking. For that, you have parts.
People can tell you facts. They can point to information they’re surprised 
you did not mention when outlining your idea. They can supply you with 
these tidbits from their own experience that seem to contradict aspects of 
what you shared. They’ll likely state these as evidence that you’re wrong. All 
of this is so useful that you ought to practice how to answer the “What are 
you up to?” question so your conversations unfold this way.

But people can’t really tell you what makes your entire idea wrong. Find-
ing that out requires you to bring what you learned back to the realm of parts 
and  “debug”  your  innovation  prototype.  You  do  that  by  specifying  anew 
what your parts do, moving them around, adding new parts, and/or remov-
ing some parts altogether.

Ultimately, you are bringing parts together to right the wrongs you’ve 
been told about. Your purpose is to find out what made your explanation ap-
pear wrong to your conversational counterpart. It may have been the presen-
tation itself, or your problem, or something in between (parts, people, scale, 
whatever).

You want other people to tell you that you’re wrong, 

and you want to probe that judgment through 

conversation.

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

137

Operating Principles for Conversations

•  Everyone you speak with is a potential expert. If you persuade 
yourself in advance that there’s no information to be gained, you 
will not gain it.
•  If your idea was so easy to explain to someone that a casual 
conversation was all a person would need to run with it, it invites 
the question: Why didn’t you just run with it?
•  Focus on the problem you are trying to solve and how you are 
going about it. Set up the conversation to ask or answer questions.
•  Your explanation to your conversational counterparts should be 
just engaging enough to make them want to know more.
•  Ask questions directly; don’t preface them with how you got to 
those questions. Save that for later, when you’re asked for more 
information. My data show conclusively that most people want to 
hear only three new things at a time.
•  There is always a way to ask a question that requires only 
minimal exposure to your idea.
•  You are not seeking approval or a pat on the back. A focus on 
why your idea is good will likely result in your getting little or no 
information.
•  Giving specifics with certitude makes it easier for people to find 
reasons in their own experiences for why they think you are 
wrong.
•  Your conversational counterparts will likely reveal information, 
and eventually share skills, expertise, or capabilities, only if they 
feel the conversation was genuine and substantive.
•  If you are offered advice, be sure to capture your counterpart’s 
rationale.
•  You can follow advice only when it makes sense to you. That 
may not happen immediately. The person who gave the advice to 
you saw something relevant before you did, and may have more to 
offer.

138 

CHAPTER 4

The  people  with  whom  you  speak  have  an  intuition—a  “verification  
recipe”  borne  of  their  experience—that  they  use  reflexively  to  judge  that 
something cannot solve the problem they imagine you want to solve. In the 
end, your own verification recipe to judge that the problem is solved will be 
informed by elements of these other recipes. This is exactly why you want 
other people to tell you that you are wrong, and why you want to probe that 
judgment through conversation.

 

INTERFACING WITH PEOPLE 

139

Takeaways

•  You have an idea. You want to be told you’re wrong. But you don’t want to 
tell yourself you’re wrong, because that will become a self-fulfilling prophecy 
and you won’t do anything more. Therefore, you need other people to tell 
you that you’re wrong.
•  To help other people tell you that you’re wrong, you need three things. 
First, you need a conversation starter—your response to the question “What 
are you up to?” Second, you have some specific things you need to know—
your uncertainties and unknowns. That knowledge could come from your 
conversational counterparts. Third, you must have a genuine desire to listen 
to what others are up to.
•  You need to resist the urge to categorize people you talk to for the purpose 
of counting them. Your purpose is not to figure out now what scale looks like 
in terms of people.
•  You’re talking to humans, and humans make terrible robots. Humans are 
incredibly bad at following the instruction set of your preconceived arche-
types. But you can figure out something from their individual experiences 
and from the specific information they may provide that will improve your 
hunch, refine your problem, and help you reconceive what you prototype for 
impact.
•  Your innovation prototype will accrue people through these conversations 
as users, team members, and so on.

140 

CHAPTER 4

     5
5

at a small scale,  

nonlinearity is your ally     

The smaller the scale, the bigger the space you can explore.

You can turn nonlinearity—one of the culprits responsible for the fright-
ening things about innovating—into your advantage. This is what chapters 3 
and 4 prepare you for: essentially, to explore an increasingly diverse set of 
larger realities by systematically adding, discarding, and recombining easily 
accessible parts and insights or skills brought to you by people. That’s how 
you  learn  far,  far  more  than  the  resources  you  have  would  suggest  is 
possible.

In this chapter, I tell you how to use nonlinearity to your advantage. Spe-
cifically, I tell you what this nonlinearity means to you, how to exploit it to 
make your idea more robust, how it helps you explore impact and scale, and 
ultimately how you can develop your own sense of progress absent the con-
venience of a linear indicator of progress. No such indicator actually exists.

What is nonlinearity?

As I note in chapter 1, the process of innovation is nonlinear. That means you 
cannot count on things being easy to forecast. I use “nonlinear” to mean that 
small changes at the outset of your process may have unpredictably large ef-
fects on the outcome. The converse is also true: Slight changes in the out-
come you envision may imply dramatically different starting points.
Nonlinearity also implies that enacting the process of innovation requires 
that you and your evolving hunch undergo some form of recurrence or itera-
tion through which the problem you solve becomes increasingly clear and 
nuanced.1 Some call this approximation, relaxation, multivariate optimiza-
tion, chaos, and other things, but what’s important is that unless you have 
pre-specified a solution there likely 
are  many  solutions,  and  getting  to 
them  will  require  that  you  know 
when to stop.

The smaller the 

scale, the bigger  

the space you  

can explore.

If you are a physicist or an engi-
neer, you likely are already familiar 
with the idea that “rules” can be dif-
ferent at different scales. You see this 
in quantum versus classical mechan-
ics, or microeconomics versus mac-
roeconomics. Chemical engineering 
as a discipline exists precisely to deal 
with  differences  at  lab  scale  versus 
factory scale.

In innovation, too, “rules” can be 
different at different scales. Seemingly small changes to the problem that 
gives you purpose may translate into dramatic changes in impact. Similarly, 
seemingly innocent changes to how you envision impact may fundamentally 
change the nature of the problem and possibly help you overcome challenges 
that appeared insurmountable.

146 

CHAPTER 5

Pilots

I am often asked whether people should run pilots of their ideas.

I think a pilot is always a good idea; however, pilots—like products—
are already very sophisticated constructs. Running a pilot is generally a 
significant  project.  It  requires  lots  of  resources  and  a  conscious 
commitment to an idea. But even if the time is not right for a pilot, the 
pilot mentality is the right mentality to have from the very beginning, 
when all decisions are yet to be made.

How do you achieve that mentality? You bring the problem down to a 
scale that’s likely smaller than what a pilot would entail. At that scale, 
which I’ve been calling table scale, the purpose isn’t yet to assess the scale-
up needs. Rather, it is a way to discover a direction and a path to scale-up 
that you can think of as a sort of sequence of pilots.

It helps to think of pilots as intermediate checkpoints that help you 
correct course by “linearizing” the challenges and the risks that lie ahead.

You may already be experiencing this nonlinearity without realizing it. 
After all, that innovations can be disruptive and that disrupting technolo-
gies/innovations/products are at first underperforming the incumbents are 
both outcomes of nonlinearity. If you take those facts as givens for innova-
tions, this is what you may be implicitly accepting about their origins: dis-
ruption  is  an  outcome;  you  can  only  speculate  what  will  be  disrupted, 

In innovation, as in physics, “rules” are different  

at different scales.

 

AT A SMALL SCALE, NONLINEARITY IS YOUR ALLY 

147

whether it will be disrupted, and how; and that at first your idea will underper-
form everything else out there. It follows that what you start with is incremen-
tal—that is, not disruptive—and underachieving. And so, surprisingly, what 
you set yourself to build may not need to be better now than what already ex-
ists; it simply has to be worse today than what it will become tomorrow.

Nonlinearity need not be frightening

The fear of nonlinearity might push you toward wanting to specify as much 
of what you will do as you can and as early as you can—in other words, to 
paint a rosy deterministic future. There is no guarantee that doing so helps in 
any way, but it’s still what most people do.

Predicting a rosy future is unnecessarily limiting; you need only ensure 
that at least one future exists. You can explore a lot if you let future be a vari-
able and you constantly revisit your variables and your assumptions. And if 
you strive to demonstrate tangibly to yourself first that you will not fail in a 
predictable way when the time comes to get to the next scale, you will ensure 
that at least one future exists.

The way I see it, this nonlinearity is the best news ever:
•  The combination of mostly existing parts can lead to something that’s 
game changing.
•  At the right scale, changing small parts allows you to explore an  
incredibly broad space of opportunities for impact.
•  Everything you learn through those changes prepares you to develop a 
robust  organization  that  operates  on  an  entire  space  of  opportunity, 
rather than focusing on a single product or technology.
•  Operating on an entire space of opportunity increases the chances that 
at least one future exists.
I cannot imagine how you would ever be able to explore as much as you 

need to were it not for this nonlinearity.

148 

CHAPTER 5

In 1879, Thomas Edison completed the first successful test of a commer-
cially viable electric light bulb. His light bulb was essentially a filament sealed 
inside a glass bulb. The glass bulb provided a vacuum. Edison filed for a pat-
ent on November 4.

From 1875 to 1883, Edison reportedly experimented by inserting all sorts 
of  things  into  the  same  vacuum.  One  thing  he  discovered  was  that,  if  he 
placed a cold electric plate inside the vacuum, electrons would travel from 
the filament through the vacuum and would create a current in the plate; 
however, electrons would not travel in the opposite direction. Reportedly, 
Edison saw no value in that, but he still went ahead and patented it. Some-
time  around  1906,  Sir  John  Fleming  applied  what  Edison  had  discovered 
about the current and developed the first vacuum tube, which he used to 
demodulate radio signals.

The first vacuum tube allowed current to flow in only one direction. To-
day, we call that a diode. Early commercial “Fleming valves” appeared in the 
late 1910s. Until the advent of the transistor in the 1950s, the vacuum tube 
was the basic building block for all electronic devices. It is still used today in 
high-end audio applications and other contexts.

It all began with a light bulb and a thin metal plate—two readily acces-
sible parts at the time. Although the change was small, its impact was, argu-
ably, disruptive. It launched the field of electronics.

Google provides another example. In this case, the power of exploration 
came from a change in parts following insights that emerged from people. 
Many attribute Google’s success to the simple realization that the same algo-
rithm so powerful for ranking websites could also be used to rank advertise-
ments—a  small  change.  Reportedly,  that  small  change  yielded  a  dramatic 
innovation in the business model that solved a problem that had grown to 
epic proportions: The Web had become a nightmare full of poorly perform-
ing banner ads. Whether that’s how the Google story actually happened or 
how it is remembered in hindsight is less important than what the story im-
plies for your innovating. You can easily imagine a casual conversation with 
another person leading to these seemingly unassuming questions: “What if 
the search is not for websites but for ads? Could you guys search for that?” 

 

AT A SMALL SCALE, NONLINEARITY IS YOUR ALLY 

149

The strength lies not in the questions but in recognizing that it is such a 
small change that entertaining and eventually verifying the possibility is eas-
ier than any attempt at rationalization. 

These two examples point to an important aspect of nonlinearity: Re-
placing a part or taking to heart an idea that emerges from a conversation 
isn’t enough in isolation. To derive a benefit from this nonlinearity, you’ve 
got to be able to see your innovation prototype both for the small-scale as-
sembly of parts and people it is and for the larger reality it illustrates. As the 
Edison example shows, without that “duality” it may otherwise take years 
and someone else to answer the question of what a new combination (of 
parts and people) demonstrates is possible.

Nonlinearity’s effect on mind-set

It may take some getting used before you can fully appreciate the power that 
comes from leveraging the nonlinearities of innovation to explore an entire 
space of opportunity. As simple as the process of exploration is—that is, re-
place readily accessible parts with other readily accessible parts and embrace 
or discard insights emerging after a conversation—there is nothing obvious 
about why it works until you’ve practiced it a few times. But imagine what 
becomes possible: You set yourself up to discover what makes you wrong so 
you can keep on changing seemingly innocuous parts and become ever more 
aware and knowledgeable about the problem you are solving. 

Nonlinearity makes exploring inexpensive. You 

needn’t gamble it all on one future but can explore 

an entire space of opportunity.

150 

CHAPTER 5

The idea that this kind of inexpensive exploration can yield powerful 
insights with which you can conceive and plan many large-scale systems is 
somewhat paradoxical, but it is indeed one of the most powerful instruments 
in your inquiry. It helps you to implement the principle I introduce in chap-
ter 3 to learn a vastly disproportionate and indeed unreasonable amount with 
the resources you have, rather than postponing learning for when you have 
more resources, and it reduces your need to gamble on one specific future.

With this mind-set, what’s important about parts is that you can swap 
them out for new ones that cast a better light on the problem and that leads 
to new people; everything else about parts is accessory. Similarly, what’s im-
portant about conversations with people at the current scale is how each con-
versation stands to change the way you look at a problem and points to new 
parts; you decide which insights derived through conversation to keep and 
which to leave for later. You are not designing for specific people any more 
than you are imposing specific parts on your problem.

Disciplinary blinders

My terminology throughout the book is crafted to help you overcome one of 
the  difficulties  associated  with  innovating.  Like  me,  you  may  have  been 
trained in a specific discipline. It is hard to let go of that investment. Yet by 
the  time  you  are  done  and  successful,  your  innovating  will  have  emerged 
from an amalgam of disciplines that no one had put together in quite the 
same way before. How did that happen? You must have stepped out of your 
discipline  at  some  point.  You  might  as  well  resolve  to  do  that  from  the 
outset.

Your innovating may require you to bring together parts in the way Edi-
son did, undeterred by whether the conventional wisdom advises you that 
those parts do not belong together; it is reported that Edison may also have 
tried with a feather. Or it may require that you be alert for comments that 
seem off the mark at first, as the idea of searching for ads did. Some great 
ideas may sound preposterous at first.

 

AT A SMALL SCALE, NONLINEARITY IS YOUR ALLY 

151

Trying to combine seemingly distinct parts and asking yourself “What 
might be possible now?” may appear to be somewhat unorthodox. There are, 
however, few other ways to allow yourself to bring “preposterous” combina-
tions  together.  Our  education  in  specific  disciplines—the  praise  given  in 
school to multidisciplinary thinking notwithstanding—is what makes the 
proposition sound absurd. Yet it is no more absurd in spirit than the belief 
that led the founders of Greenpeace to charter a fishing boat to stop the 
United States from testing nuclear bombs. There is no guarantee that your 
preposterous idea will ever be recognized as anything other than preposter-
ous; rather, it is largely a matter of how driven you are to find a successful 
path to scale and how malleable you allow your problem to be. And that 
hinges upon your not mistaking the power of your imagination for proof.

Impact

There is a reason why this kind of exploration works: In the end, the only 
thing that matters is impact.

Impact does not stem from the parts you have, how new they are, what 
people say, or how many of them fit your preferred archetype. It stems from 
whether the community that experiences the problem you are solving is able 
to accomplish new things after you’ve solved it. Surprisingly, the nature of 
the problem doesn’t seem to matter; rather, what matters is what happens 
after the problem is solved. Perhaps that’s why, as I discuss in chapter 2, no 
one ever defines problems directly.

You can rationalize whatever happens after the problem is solved as val-
ue, empowerment, value proposition, benefits, or satisfaction. Economists 
use the concept of progress. When the solution involves technology—here 
I’m using the definition of technology that launched MIT: something that 
“serves to extend the dominion of mankind over nature”2—they call it tech-
nological progress, which people liken to technological innovation.3

152 

CHAPTER 5

After the fact, the magnitude of the impact may be gauged by number of 
people, or by sales, or by increase in gross product per capita, or by health, or 
by productivity, or by number of citations, or by the reputation of an award. 
But actual  impact  stems  from  the  fact  that  those  people—however  many 
there are—can no longer fathom a world in which the problem you solved 
was a problem.

It is easy to get sidetracked by numbers. It is even easier to aim for actual 
impact: You need to think about everything you’ve been learning from your 
conversations with parts and people as a whole, and imagine how the lives of 
others might improve as a result of the outcomes of your innovating. Because 
imagining the lives of others may be difficult, you can start looking for inspi-
ration in other stories you know about how outcomes have positively affect-
ed people’s lives (to use them as parts if you will), or even begin with your 
own life and the lives of members of your team. What “magical” things might 
you really be able to accomplish after you are done with your innovating?

Only impact matters: people can’t fathom a world 
with the problem you erased.

Progress as learning

The fact that the process is nonlinear does not imply that you have to dis-
pense with observing progress. It simply means that you should not expect to 
measure progress as a function of what you are building. Rather, it is your 
understanding of the problem that progresses.

You can observe learning as a function of the precision of the questions 
you pose to parts and people, and in the ease with which you recombine 

 

AT A SMALL SCALE, NONLINEARITY IS YOUR ALLY 

153

parts or insights. You can also observe learning in any of the measures of 
progress that are generally associated with the kind of learning you do by 
practicing.

When you’ve progressed so much that it seems that you get things right 
more often than you get them wrong, or when you feel that there is a set of 
ideas and combinations that stubbornly refuse to prove themselves wrong, 
you can take that as an indication that the scale you are at has become too 
small.

The effects of nonlinearity on time

Time and resources are, arguably, the two most precious commodities as you 
evolve  your  innovating  toward  impact.  Both  are  affected  by  nonlinearity. 
Mastering both can be greatly helped by managing the scale at which you 
operate. I have discussed how you can make nonlinearity work to your ad-
vantage to learn a disproportionate amount from what you have. Time is also 
your ally, but the way nonlinearities help you manage that time may be a bit 

more counterintuitive.

your ally.

Time is also  

As far as time is concerned, nonlinearity 
means  there  is  no  relationship  between 
your rushing to market and growing fast. 
Similarly, when adoption kicks in, keeping 
up  with  demand  will  become  the  chal-
lenge. In the epilogue to this book, I dis-
cuss how this nonlinearity relates to tech-
nology  adoption  curves  and  to  concepts 
such as the “chasm.” In practice, nonlinearity implies that questions begin-
ning with “When should I“ or “When do I” (e.g., “When should I search for 
funding?” or “When do I know I have to pivot?”) may make sense only when 
you retrace the steps of your story in hindsight. In foresight, they are mean-
ingless. Because there is no linear relationship between time and progress, 

154 

CHAPTER 5

time is as bad an indicator of progress in innovating as is weather. And you 
can really only answer these questions with the Zen-like “when the time is 
right.”

In foresight, the solution is to ignore time altogether and focus instead 
on preparing for scale. The time will be right when you are ready to learn 
from resources at the next scale in much the same way you learn from re-
sources at the current scale.

Preparing for scale helps you master time in two ways: through resources 

and by sampling.

On the one hand, the strategy I propose to use resources at scale helps 
you manage time by increasing the breadth and rate at which you explore the 
problem. You can halt your exploration at any time and pass your under-
standing of the problem to future-you or to someone else. (See chapter 6.) 
Front-loading your exploration, when time is less costly, allows you to ex-
plore an entire space of opportunity. (See chapter 7.) At this scale, it takes 
weeks, not months, to explore a problem meaningfully. (See chapter 11.) And 
there is a simple way to make your project count toward your larger innovat-
ing objectives through documentation regardless of whether you’ve already 
found a way to bring it to the next scale. (See chapter 12.)

Nothing is lost if you stop, and you need no more than a month to ex-
plore at a small scale before it becomes advisable to distance yourself from 
the project.

On the other hand, if you choose to continue, you need to translate all 
the “When should I” and “When do I” questions into “How often will I” 
questions. For instance, fundraising is a recurring task that you will do every 
so often until your organization evolves to sustain itself through sales (a con-
tinuous task). At a high level, this simply means that as you progress in scale 
you will have to organize tasks by at least two criteria relative to time: tasks 
you will need to execute continuously and tasks you will need to revisit con-
tinually. In a way, the need to get organized emerges first from accepting that 
innovating is highly nonlinear.

In chapters 7–10, I discuss the dynamics imposed on your innovating by 
nonlinearity and reveal how to relate the skills you build through innovating 
to organizational building.

 

AT A SMALL SCALE, NONLINEARITY IS YOUR ALLY 

155

Takeaways

•  There is a way to turn nonlinearity to your advantage and explore a space  
  of opportunity systematically, rather than constraining yourself to a pre- 
  specified future. It comes to you from chapters 3, 4, and 5:
 
 
 
 
 
 

Combine a few parts.
Start substituting those parts.
Talk with a few people.
Look  for  patterns  in  the  combination  of  parts  and  insights  from  
other people.
Outline a few (say, three to five) distinct opportunities for impact.

 
 
 
 
 
 

intuition is needed. What matters is what you think is possible after the  

•  It’s  great  if  you  have  an  intuition  for  how  to  combine  parts,  but  no  
 
  parts are combined. Learn what happens then. Ask yourself what new  
  problem those parts might solve together. Pay attention to how people  
  “misinterpret” your idea; those are small changes. Work the small changes  
  back as parts: How are your idea and their “misinterpretation” the same?
•  As your idea grows, you’ll have more than parts and people; you’ll also  
  have sets of comments and ensembles of parts that you believe may work  
  together in multiple scenarios. You may even be able to imagine going  
  from one scenario to the next with only small changes to parts. Note that  
  all this makes the concept of a near miss paramount.
•  As your exploration continues, you should be able to demonstrate each  
  opportunity with a different combination of parts. Each demonstration  
  should be reasonably robust to slight changes in several of those parts.  
  You have created a space of opportunity.
•  When you look back after you’re done executing your plan, you’ll  
  probably notice that you have used a lot of the insights that emerged from  
  how you  built this space of opportunity. To people unfamiliar with how  

156 

156 

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

  you envisioned your opportunity, it will look as if you changed your idea  
  continually, but that’s just a by-product of how you built the connections  
  between parts and impact. There was no need for you to figure out how  
  to “pivot.”
•  Time is your ally.

 

AT A SMALL SCALE, NONLINEARITY IS YOUR ALLY 

157

     6
6

a kit to drive 

innovation, anywhere     

There is a way to capture everything discussed in chapters 1, 2, 3, and 4 into a 
kit for innovating.

The very idea that you can somehow innovate using a kit probably sounds 
like nonsense at first, but it should make perfect sense if you think about 
what you actually have every time you restate your problem. After all, you 
can get started with parts lying around, and all you need is a hunch and a 
desire to refine a problem as you learn about that problem using those parts 
along with people. Your sense of impact drives you to make the problem tan-
gible, and in the course of the process you discover and select from among 
multiple versions of the problem; you do so by outlining the next set of parts 
and people you need. Why, then, can’t you take all of that, package it to-
gether, and pass it on to others to get them started with their own innovat-
ing? That’s your kit. And because those others have their own sense of im-
pact, you have every reason to expect that they will use the kit and end up 
addressing a different variant of the original problem.

So at a high level, the kit is just that: what you end up with after you try 
to  restate  your  problem.  It’s  your  best  understanding  of  the  problem,  the 
novelty,  and  the  impact  as  it  emerges  from  the  parts  and  people  you’ve 
brought together thus far. Still, the notion that you can produce a kit for in-
novating may seem like nonsense.

This chapter could easily have ended here with this closing: get a hunch; 
follow what you learned in chapters 2, 3, and 4; inventory what you end up 
with; restate the problem; and pass all of that on to someone else—or to fu-
ture-you. And perhaps that’s all you need to dive into the next chapter. That 
may be the case, for instance, if you are engaged in innovating right now—
and if you are, feel free to skip to the takeaways of this chapter and then move 
on to chapter 7.

You can tame 

a kit.

problem with  

any real-world 

But  the  entire  book  could  also 
have  started  with  this  chapter.  For 
instance,  you  may  be  interested  in 
several other contexts in which you 
may find an innovation prototyping 
kit useful. You may need to set up an 
innovation process in your organiza-
tion. You may find yourself needing 
to pass the results of your innovating 
to someone else so that person can 
use everything you’ve learned in his 
or her own innovating—something that happens a lot in any organization or 
business with a research arm. Perhaps you have generated some intellectual 
property and you want to engage others in devising ways to bring it to im-
pact.  You  may  be  interested  in  technology  transfer.  Perhaps  you  want  to 
teach innovating in a hands-on way.

Before I go into the details of how to build an innovation prototyping kit 
that helps you in each of these contexts, let me show you how it can be useful 
to get others innovating.

162 

CHAPTER 6 

Innovating does not always begin with an individual. Even when it does, 
it is only a matter of time before a group of people come together. Some-
times, groups come together to engage in innovating from the very begin-
ning. They become a team some time further down the line, when the group 
learns  to  communicate  effectively  around  what  amounts  to  a  hunch,  and 
when each team member has found a way to put to use his or her diverse 
background and interests to contribute to a shared objective for which they 
all feel ownership. Yes, that’s right: a group of n people only does not a team 
make.

You may find yourself needing to drive one such group engaged in inno-
vating, or you may be a manager in circumstances where groups of co-work-
ers are expected to engage in innovation activities as a team. Perhaps you’re 
expected to teach students about innovation as a concept and then give them 
something to do. What approach should you take?

In my experience, you have two general options. One is to drive the group 
to produce and accrue as many ideas as possible, usually in a vacuum, and 
then compromise to pick one. The other is to drive a team to work on mak-
ing tangible a problem or problems given to the team at the start. The latter 
option replicates what Henry Ford, Theodore Maiman, Johnny Chung Lee, 
and the founders of Greenpeace all did. They began with a problem, and 
went from there. That’s where a kit comes in.

The two options—idea harvesting and working with a kit—represent 
two  very  different  paths  on  which  a  team  will  travel,  and  lead  to  very 
different outcomes. One leads to a list of idea statements; the other leads to 

When a group eventually comes together, it 

isn’t yet a team. Those people must learn to 

communicate about a hunch.

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

163

a set of strategic decisions to be made about a tangible problem. They also 
represent  two  fundamentally  different  belief  systems  about  what  an  idea 
means: the former needs good ideas to be recognizable, whereas the latter 
presumes  that  what  makes  an  idea  good  is  that  people  can  evolve  it  into 
something better. So, when making a choice you need to be cognizant of 
what you’re deciding. Of course, if the first four chapters of this book tell you 
anything, it’s that I advocate for taking the latter path of driving a team to 
work on a problem, prototyping the problem, and going from there.

As a matter of fact, I find the high hopes associated with idea-harvesting 
to be perplexing—whether it is in the form of a single brainstorming session 
or in the many forms a “call for ideas” takes in classrooms and corporations. 
This is worth a brief digression. Let me outline the problem I see in processes 
that begin with a “call for ideas.” (The following diagram shows what I mean 
by the idea-harvesting path in a nutshell.)

164 

CHAPTER 6 

If you opt for accruing as many ideas as possible, that’s what you’ll get—a 
lot of statements of ideas. You now need someone to tell you which idea is 
“the one.” By construction, that person is not invested in or tasked with ad-
vancing any of those ideas. There is no guarantee that even a single idea is 
actually good. As a matter of fact, the account in chapter 1 of how several 
innovations emerged shows that good and bad ideas are likely to be indistin-
guishable at this stage. Still, you need to review them all. You will be under 
pressure to pick at least one.

Suppose that I’m wrong and there are several dozen good ideas—by some 
absolute criteria of “goodness.” Most ideas will be somehow inspired by what 
your organization does today, but it would be serendipitous if any one of 
them were to match a specific problem relevant to your organization’s strategy 
or a real-world problem you’re prepared to recognize.

The “Law of Large Numbers” applies here—in a negative way for inno-
vation. The law expresses the idea that after you collect a handful of samples 
the addition of another sample is not going to change the mean significantly. 
Once you get a sufficient number of samples (in our case, ideas), you’ll begin to 
see a convergence to the mean. In other words, the more ideas you have, the 
easier it becomes to gravitate to the “average” idea. Mathematics is clear on 
this: Unless you look at each idea for what it is, the only purpose of gathering 
many ideas is to assess some statistic—in modern parlance, we might call it 
“analytics,” “idea funneling,” or “dealing with idea overload.” It all boils down 
to whether you believe that the idea is the one that enough people will have. 
You’re taking it on faith that the “average” will be a “bright” idea.

The only thing we can say for certain is that your innovation process will 
begin each and every time with more (often many more) ideas than it ends 
up with—a funnel! But even this observation is marred by the paradoxes as-
sociated with hindsight—just like identifying something as an “innovation” 
long after the fact. Any selection process, good or bad, will act as a funnel. 
Naturally, the “good” selection process will be the one that leads to the “good” 
idea.

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

165

A Mathematical Nemesis of Idea Harvesting

The  idea  harvesting  approach  has  another  mathematical  nemesis:  the 
central limit theorem. If you use a bunch of random generation processes 
to amass ideas, the resulting means from all of them together will end up 
as  a  normal  distribution.  This  will  make  it  easy  to  characterize  the 
distribution of ideas you harvested, but it will create the same imperative 
as with the Law of Large Numbers: taking it on faith that the “average” 
will be a “bright” idea.

As  it  turns  out,  mathematics  comes  with  a  rather  large  supply  of 
practical nemeses that challenge the implementation of idea harvesting. 
There’s even the infinite monkey theorem: that a monkey hitting keys at 
random  for  an  infinite  amount  of  time  will  almost  surely  type  all  the 
works  of  William  Shakespeare.  Similarly,  a  group  of  good  innovators 
tasked with generating as many ideas as possible will almost surely—given 
sufficient time—invent everything there is to invent.

The only apparent way around the nemeses mathematics presents for 
the idea harvesting game is to employ some criteria to sort and filter those 
“idea statements.” The objective is to define rankings and filters that will 
distinguish that one “good” idea from all the others. You can use several 
modern techniques conceived to address this kind of idea and information 
overload.  However,  they  are  all  based  on  accruing  first  some  kind  of 
statistical understanding of the distribution of ideas, which brings you 
back to square one: You thought you were sorting through ideas to avoid 
the mathematical nemeses behind idea harvesting and the central limit 
theorem hit you while you were distracted in your tallying.

There  are  some  good  things  about  this.  One  is  that,  no  matter  the 
innovation process, you don’t need more than a handful of idea-producing 
units to be able to characterize your innovation activity with the simplicity 
of the normal distribution. Another is that, given sufficient time, you’ll 
invent something very good—and even more. In either case, you will need 
to  worry  only  about  training  good  idea  scouts.  By  analogy  with  the 
infinite monkey theorem, that’s a well-nourished team of expert readers 
who can read everything your monkey-innovators type and then tease out 
the works of Shakespeare as they emerge piecemeal and disorderly.

166 

CHAPTER 6 

In summary, opt for this path and you may find that you’ve actually made 
things unnecessarily difficult. You began with a desire to innovate. You chose 
a process that moved you quickly away from innovating and from the idea 
generators and to selecting from an enormously large pool of potentially very 
bad ideas. Worse, there is no way to know how to make the right choice or 
even whether there is a right choice, and meanwhile the idea producer who 
could explain what he or she meant has long since “abandoned” the process. 
A lot of time spent, and none of it on improving the “idea.” All you have is 
the conviction that among so many ideas one ought to be good. But even 
that belief is questionable. Applied to mining, the same deeply held belief 
might push you to discard prospecting altogether and instead acquire land, 
as if owning more land automatically increased the odds of finding the ore 
you want.1

You have translated a potentially creative endeavor into an actuarial one. 
And like a good actuary, your concern will be about a process that is efficient 
rather than a process that unearths what’s best about an idea—a concept fun-
damentally  different  than  unearthing  the  “best”  idea.  One  thing  is  true, 
though: When it’s your turn to report you’ll be able to share lots of num-
bers—for example,

We got x ideas. We developed a process A to trim them down by 50 percent, 
and then we sent comments back. Those ideas were further down-selected to 
a fourth of the original list, and with those we did a workshop with middle 
management, using Post-its, in which we discussed and re-ranked the ideas 
and ended up with another reduction by 50 percent. All in all, we engaged 
x*2 people from 50 departments throughout the company. Today, we’re pre-
senting the ‘winning’ 1 percent, and our leading idea is a fitness band that 
talks to your cell phone, pays like a credit card, and does laundry. What a 
great innovation!
A good group of senior managers would, and should, be horrified that so 
many person-hours were spent in an actuarial process initially conceived as a 
way to supply the firm with competitive advantage for years to come. Months 
were lost, lots of resources were used up, and the “idea” likely resembles some-
thing that already exists. All these outcomes are by-products of the process 

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

167

itself, the fatally flawed design of which ends up putting a halt to any work 
on the ideas before a selection is made. So, the ideas remain much as they 
were when the process began.

Let me motivate this last point, using the language I have been using all 
along: Idea-harvesting processes really set out to select among what I have 
called hunches. And because at first nothing about an innovation is really 
new, you should expect to find just that—a bunch of ill-formed ideas that are 
mostly wrong and ring as déjà-vu.

These  idea-harvesting  processes  are  appealing  because  they  make  
accountability easier. There are lots of variants, many of which have tried to 
overcome the limitations inherent to the approach by incorporating ideas 
from  the  design  world  and  from  so-called  “lean  thinking.”  You  can  read 
about a representative example from Adobe in the box titled “Kickbox.”

Good intentions notwithstanding, idea-harvesting processes probe cre-
ativity once and consume all resources as they sift through the mess that re-
sulted from that lone outburst of unfettered creativity. But it takes more than 
a variant on idea harvesting to overcome a fundamental flaw in the approach: 
After the idea has been boxed, no one is actually working on it, yet you are 
still expending resources. Your innovation process begins with a waiting 
period.

Senior managers should be horrified by the 

resources spent on idea harvesting—an actuarial 

process— rather than on innovating.

168 

CHAPTER 6 

Kickbox

Adobe’s “Kickbox”—“open source” and available to anyone—is a good 
example of the approach to innovation that begins with accruing as many 
ideas as possible.* The small, red box is touted by at least one management 
professor  as  “containing  everything  an  employee  needs  to  generate, 
prototype, and test a new idea.”** And what might everything be?

“When  you  break  open  the  seal,”  the  professor  writes,  “you’ll  find 
instruction cards, a pen, two Post-it note pads, two notebooks, a Starbucks 
gift  card,  a  bar  of  chocolate  and  (most  importantly)  a  $1,000  prepaid 
credit card. The card can be used on anything the employee would like or 
need without ever having to justify it or fill out an expense report.”

In a video introducing the Kickbox, an Adobe executive characterizes 
it as “like the angel investor. There’s everything inside you need to go do 
it, now.”*** Of course, having an angel investor presumes you’ve already got 
an  idea  worth  taking  forward.  In  essence,  the  Kickbox  and  the  brain-
storming session both are begging for innovation in hindsight, pushing 
you to an endpoint without having made any determination of whether 
your idea needs some refinement as it reaches its future.

 *http://kickbox.adobe.com/what-is-kickbox

 **David Burkus,“Inside Adobe’s innovation kit,” Harvard Business Review, February 23, 2015.

***http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VU4XYGuUh_0

 

Months of innovators-in-waiting and hunches in the dry dock follow the 
call for ideas. Some are waiting for selection to finish to approve a budget 
and others are waiting for approval of an idea. It isn’t even clear that the idea 
supply and idea demand are all that well aligned with expectations about 
what will happen when the waiting is over.

There is definitely something paradoxical about ideating a process that 
begins with a call for ideas and moves soon thereafter into boxing ideas for 
sorting  and  voting  and  away  from  working  on  the  ideas  themselves.  As  I 
mention in chapter 1, coming up with an earth-shattering idea can easily turn 
into a rather stressful endeavor that postpones the kind of work that might 

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

169

help  evolve  an  initial  hunch—however  ill-informed—into  something 
valuable.

There is, however, good news. The same resources expended selecting 
could go to advising people to hold off on the Post-it and instead work a bit 
on making their problem tangible, perhaps all the way to a proposal. Wheth-
er you are tasked with implementing a new process to cull the creativity of 
your organization or are asked to respond to a call for ideas, getting tangible 
is so easy that you can always opt to go that way.

The concept of an innovation prototyping kit can help you with that.
This is how you go about it.  As an innovator, your objective is not to 
share an idea right away but to evolve one until you feel it is worth diving 
into. Your ultimate goal isn’t approval or selection of the idea; it is to advo-
cate for a decision about a specific allocation of resources to bring your in-
novating to the next scale. From a management standpoint, your objective is 
to establish a process by which the best ideas self-select, so you minimize the 
guesswork regarding which idea is best and instead set yourself up to make 
decisions about how to allocate resources strategically.

In  the  following  illustration,  you  see  that  the  innovation  prototyping 
path makes things easier. The idea is to entice a group to replicate the unas-
suming  approach  to  innovating  described  in  earlier  chapters  by  driving  a 
team to work on making a problem or problems tangible.

The actual setup will vary depending on whether you give these prob-
lems to a team at the start, whether you are trying to develop your own team, 
or whether you ask people in your organization to put forth ideas that you 
will then help evolve. But the mechanism is rather simple: conceiving an in-
novation prototyping kit to jump-start your innovating. And the objective is 
the same in all cases: to apply the same resources (labor and capital) you 
might otherwise have applied to combing through idea statements to help 
“hunches” evolve.

For the innovators-in-the-making you are trying to inspire, this is a chal-
lenge and an opportunity: You get to self-select by demonstrating the value 
behind your ideas, at the same time making your ideas better. For the manag-
ers and decision makers who oversee the process, the job is arguably closer to 

170 

CHAPTER 6 

The Innovation Prototyping sequence.

their current job descriptions: you can focus on mentoring in the process and 
making decisions about allocating resources, which is arguably easier and less 
stressful than forecasting which hunches are the wheat, which are the chaff, 
and how to separate the two.

Success is not measured by the number of ideas. It is measured by how 
much you’ve learned about new potential outcomes for innovating and by 
how much leverage you stand to obtain from spending additional resources 
to allow some of these ideas to progress. Ideas progress when they prove—or 
disprove—the viability of the concept at the next scale. Because the method 
is premised on the idea that everything can and should be demonstrated first 
at scale, thriftiness is already embedded in the process. Your job is to decide 
whether you agree that the “proofs” you’ll get upon deploying resources in 
the manner proposed are interesting to you, or whether you believe some 

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

171

other “proof of concept” is needed. This all builds on the premise of this 
book: that you are best served when people produce something about which 
a decision can be made early on—whether that decision is to keep going, pro-
duce a variant, pursue something else, scale up, invest, or whatever—and that 
it does not take millions of dollars to arrive at a point at which you can make 
that kind of a determination based on fact; all it takes is an understanding of 
innovating as a scale-up sequence from which the actual innovations emerge.
What to do next may include assembling some different people, provid-

You are best served by ideas that evolve into 

something that demands a decision: Keep going? 

Produce a variant? Pursue something else? Scale 

up? Invest? Whatever?

ing some funding, acquiring new or different parts, and so on—in effect, 
everything I discuss in this book that you can do to make a problem increas-
ingly tangible. Next steps will be based on a decision about something real, 
not on an actuarial sorting process. Further, working with a team on this 
path keeps you firmly in the capacity of a doer involved in actual doing.

Along this path, your team confronts a problem that needs to be solved. 
The team makes the problem tangible, prototypes the problem at a small 
scale, and in doing so shows what needs to be done next. Then, if the time is 
right, a straightforward decision can be made: Should group X be given re-
sources Y to accomplish objective Z? The senior managers who earlier were 
horrified by what was expended on an actuarial process ought to welcome 
this alternative.

172 

CHAPTER 6 

Ultimately, however, it all boils down to your belief system about innova-
tion. This book is based on the notion that simply accruing a bunch of ideas 
and then sharing them has much less value than working on ideas until the 
need for a decision is apparent. That decision may now be based on the in-
trinsic merit of what is being proposed rather than the relative merit of one 
thing against a set of ideas based on some arbitrary set of criteria (e.g., nov-
elty, disruptive, creative, user-based, and so on). This matters because the 
“best idea” is actually a function of the endpoint. Early on, you’re essentially 
guessing, and typically the criteria for selecting are just means to conceal that 
that’s what you are doing.

For innovating, it doesn’t matter whether there’s a funnel paring down 
from a larger to a smaller number of ideas, or whether you begin with one 
idea and stick with it. Creativity, novelty, and the disruptive nature of your 
idea are all outcomes. What matters is impact. From the outset, an innova-
tion prototyping kit helps you place the emphasis on the problem, make a 
tangible demonstration, and proceed to reduce the process to “decidability”—
meaning that “ideators” can advocate for a decision based on real next steps.
Whether you are setting the process, responding to a call for ideas, or 
simply creating a team, you need a way to embody the problem you are solv-
ing  so  that  others  can  join  you  in  the  endeavor  (as  teammates,  directors, 
funders, etc.). In the next paragraphs, I build on chapters 1, 2, 3, and 4 to de-
scribe what actually comprises an innovation prototyping kit and how it em-
bodies the essence of this approach to innovating—namely, parts, scale, and 
people—and the logic of problem solving. I also discuss how to set up a pro-
cess that helps teams engage in innovating, and what to expect from a team 
when its turn comes to advocate for resources it needs next.

What is an innovation prototyping kit?

In essence, an innovation prototyping kit brings together a problem, parts, 
impact, and people—the components discussed in the preceding chapters. It 

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

173

is used to direct people toward innovating and solving a real-world problem. 
The basic idea is that one such kit contains all you need to play with a prob-
lem at a table scale. But it is otherwise open-ended.

The very idea of such a kit is premised on some notions discussed in 
chapters 1 and 2. The first is that to start innovating, all you need is a hunch. 
In other words, you don’t need an earth-shattering idea. You don’t even need 
to  confront  a  big  problem,  only  a  real  problem—and  have  only  a  hunch 
about it. Having a hunch, as I write in chapter 2, is the most uncomplicated 
starting point for an innovation—one from which you can set forth repeat-
edly  without  fear  of  being  wrong.  A  hunch,  when  phrased  as  a  problem, 
points to a “family” of problems to be discovered and potentially addressed. 
Thus, a problem—or, more accurately, a hunch with the structure of a prob-
lem—is the first component of an innovation prototyping kit.

The second component of an innovation prototyping kit is parts. Basi-
cally, a kit need contain only a set of mostly accessible parts, along with some 
pointers  regarding  how  others  have  achieved  impact  addressing  adjacent 
problems using the same parts or similar parts. What is accessible changes 
from one context to the next. If you are working within your own means, 
what’s accessible is probably anything you have on hand, can pick up at a lo-
cal store, or can order online at a reasonable cost. This is in a sense the latter-
day equivalent of Dr. Maiman ordering a flash lamp from a photography 
catalog. The Internet is your catalog, and you may even qualify for two-day 
shipping. If you are working in an organization, what’s accessible expands. In 
principle, anything your organization does, procures, or manufactures today 
may become the basis for a part. That is how you may get your employees to 
innovate on the basis of what you already have, and to arrive at a radically 
new solution. “How others have achieved impact” can be easily described 
with a few examples of successful organizations. The purpose of such exam-
ples is to reveal the diversity of ways in which people achieve impact with 
parts not unlike those being proposed, and to provide a first indication about 
the kinds of expertise you may need to look for—that is, people.

The third component of an innovation prototyping kit is people. That 
includes  the  group  of  people  you’ve  brought  together  to  work  with  the 

174 

CHAPTER 6 

kit—the team—if that’s what you are doing. It may also include a list of peo-
ple who have agreed to make themselves available to a team, such as mentors 
and subject-matter experts inside or outside your organization. If you de-
cided to build a kit out of a technology born in your research organization, 
the list may include the inventors. The list can also be simpler, limited to an 
enumeration of your best guesses of the profiles of people the innovators may 
need to find.

The final component of the innovation prototyping kit is what I call a 
“primer,” and it is conceived to help a team overcome the fear of being wrong 
or of not knowing enough about a topic, the parts, or the modes of impact. 
This is the same fear that comes up in chapter 3, “a fear about parts and about 
getting tangible too quickly.” And it emerges from a confusion: adults who 
are too afraid of being wrong think they ought to know a lot about the parts 
before they use them. For instance, you may think you need to know a lot 
about electronics to use a micro-controller, or that you need to know a lot 
about marketing to make a meaningful assessment of user profiles and pref-
erences. The truth is that such knowledge may help you, but simply isn’t nec-
essary. Your purpose is not to advance the state of the art in either electronics 
or marketing, but rather to use parts that may be common to one of those 
disciplines for the purpose of advancing your understanding of the problem. 
You are an experimentalist. You just need to know how to put them to use 
safely and how to interpret the results they produce. That’s a much more  
accessible goal.

As you evolve your understanding of the problem, the need to fine-tune 
some aspect of your project or make specific modifications to some parts will 
lead  you  to  search  for  people  who  have  specific  expertise  you  need.  The 
primer is an instrument to help a team get up to speed with how to use the 
parts you assembled in your kit.

This primer fulfills an important objective. Most treatises on innovation 
and entrepreneurship encourage readers to avoid getting too deep into tech-
nical  experimentation  before  understanding  their  users.  In  fact,  they  are 
asked to avoid it altogether. That’s a bit extreme. You can as easily blindside 

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

175

your own inquiry by obsessing about “users.” Getting technical too quickly 
in, say, chemical engineering is as bad as getting technical too quickly in mar-
keting. You’re equally likely to be wrong about the technology, the users, and 
the “product.”

Of course, there is nothing inherently bad in being wrong—provided 
you set yourself up to discover that you’re wrong before you’re knee deep in 
it. The primer is meant to help you be wrong quicker. It teaches you how to 
use whatever parts you have or obtain to materialize ideas, and how to ap-
proach people to extract information for innovation prototyping. It helps 
you connect both parts and impact at scale so you get only as deep as the 
current scale of your project warrants.

The primer helps innovators focus on using the functionality the parts 
provide to demonstrate their own version of the problem at scale. You can 
achieve that by coupling very basic knowledge of how to use the parts them-
selves with some guidance on how to view those parts as scaled-down repre-
sentations of a larger reality—not unlike the examples in chapter 3.

For  instance,  you  can  create  a  scaled-down  version  of  the  signage  in 
Times Square. Simply use a simple circle circuit with an LED connected to a 
microcontroller that turns the LED on and off with some periodicity. In-
structions for how to build such a contraption are available for free online. If 
you train yourself to focus on what the instructions say needs to be done 
rather than on the accompanying technical explanation, you can get your 
system  working  in  about  half  an  hour,  even  with  no  prior  knowledge  of 
electronics.

In one day, with parts available online, you can build the image of your 

business online, including a purchase order system.

You can use your own everyday experience as a supermarket shopper to 
explore how users influence supply chain management. Suppose your favorite 
brand of coffee is always undersupplied. Instead of buying it “just in time,” 
make a point to stock up; every time you see it in the supermarket, empty the 
shelf. A few weeks or months later, depending on how inventory is managed 
and analyzed at your local supermarket, you’ll see the supply increase—and 
you will have an opportunity to start managing your own stock.

176 

CHAPTER 6 

No matter the topic, there is a way to bring knowledge down to a scale at 
which you can try it out and relate to it through impact, which requires little 
or no experience. That’s how you set yourself to learn incrementally about 
the ways in which a specific body of knowledge or practice applies to your 
problem. And that’s also how you can arrive quickly at a tangible demonstra-
tion of a problem. The primer ought to help your innovators get started do-
ing just that, with the parts you provide.

There is an advantage to seeing the parts you are about to assemble by 
how they represent a larger reality rather than by how they work. Your trial 
and error will benefit from all the nonlinearities of innovation. Let me ex-
plain first by example. In the Times Square example above, if you replace the 
LED with a buzzer (a task that requires a small investment of about ten sec-
onds of labor and a few cents of capital), the same circuit becomes a scale 
reproduction of an alarm clock. A small change like that in how you use the 
parts  may  translate  into  radically  different  opportunities  for  impact.  The 
converse is also true: Seemingly innocuous changes in the scope of the im-
pact you seek—such as the insights you may glean from speaking to some-
one—may fundamentally change how you assemble parts and even which 
parts to bring in. Fortunately for you, the emphasis on first demonstrating 
things at scale makes that kind of trial and error inexpensive and fun, no mat-
ter how “dramatic” the changes may be.

It may seem ludicrous to think that small changes can have such an enor-
mous impact. It defies the habit of thinking linearly. But you ought to hope 
it’s  true;  otherwise,  you  would  have  to  count  on  dramatic  and  disruptive 
change  being  the  only  source  for  equally  dramatic  changes—an  idea  that 
seems terrifying. In chapter 5, I note that it is the nonlinear nature of innova-
tion that creates this benefit from small changes. There, I use the vacuum 
tube as an illustration, noting that electronics emerged from combining two 
well-understood parts, a light bulb and a thin metal plate. All it seems to 
have taken was for Thomas Edison to accept changing parts as an operating 
principle and for Sir Jonathan Fleming to realize later that this new combina-
tion could be used for something else.

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

177

All I am suggesting is that you can use a primer to help your innovators 
think this way and, in doing so, use nonlinearity to their advantage. If you 
have not already blindsided your own inquiry with “user” or “technology,” 
you stand to benefit a lot from these nonlinearities and you will be able to 
evolve the problem that gives you purpose continuously merely by replacing 
parts and impact and asking yourself three simple questions over and over:

•  What large-scale problem are these parts evidence of?
•  What extra evidence do I need to generate to bring that problem down 
to table scale?
•  What parts do I need to bring together to generate that evidence?
This is the mind-set the primer, parts, impact, scale, and people ultimately 
enable. I conceive of the innovation prototyping kit as combining the sim-
plicity of “tinkering,” the ethic of “do-it-yourself ” for hobbyists and others, 
and the familiarity and ease of use associated with the science kits many read-
ers will remember from their youth. But there are very important differences, 
most notably that an innovation prototyping kit is meant to support open-
ended exploration.

Trial and Error and the Power of an Open-Ended Kit
Innovation requires trial and error about a problem—indeed, to a degree 
significantly greater than afforded by the existing “tools” for innovation, 
be  they  patents,  scientific  papers,  development  kits,  business  modeling 
kits,  or  sets  of  tools  for  user  discovery.  To  build  on  the  premise  that 
innovating is akin to learning, we need tools for innovation that aim at 
teaching something. Those are a special kind of tool because they must 
help you learn something about something no one else knows enough 
about. In other words, you need tools that empower learning and open-
ended exploration.

Traditionally, kits have been used as a learning “tool.” They have also 
been used as a development “tool.” So it makes sense to think of toolkits 
that could somehow combine both purposes.

178 

CHAPTER 6 

The use of kits as an educational tool to help people understand basic 
science  has  a  long  history.*  Chemistry  sets  have  been  around  since  the 
eighteenth century in Germany and England, and in the early twentieth-
century “toy” chemistry sets for home use were introduced, aimed mostly 
at teenagers. Science kits, though, are instruments with which to learn 
particular aspects of whatever is the model of science at the time the kit is 
created.  But,  as  Thomas  Kuhn  implied  in  The  Structure  of  Scientific 
Revolutions, science tends to rewrite itself every so often, so the model of 
science a kit is teaching may survive for only two or three generations.

The use of “development kits” helps people build from or interface 
with an existing product. Several software companies and several hardware 
companies use standard development kits to broaden the applicability of 
their products. Those kits, however, are only as good as the products upon 
which they stand.

The main difference between such educational and development kits 
and innovation prototyping kits is that the latter are meant to be open-
ended, designed for trial and error and for experimentation. The aim is 
not to help you understand some particular underlying science, marketing, 
or technology, but rather to help you advance in your thinking about a 
problem—which  means  learning  about  the  problem.  There  are  no 
instruction sheets that lead you to a particular conclusion show you how 
to build a particular “thing.” Nor are there “fake” open-ended questions—
Socratic  questions—at  the  end  with  suggestions  about  parameters  to 
change  or  explore  further.  Rather,  the  problem  being  tackled  always 
remains at the center of all activities with an innovation prototyping kit.
For a person leading a team, this means a kit can be used to center the 
attention  of  innovators  on  a  set  of  resources  and  a  specific  family  of 
problems.  The  creativity  comes  from  how  team  members  use  their 
backgrounds,  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  to  communicate  with 
teammates  and  others  beyond  the  team  to  reduce  the  problem  to 
tangibility.

In  short,  an  innovation  kit  simply  allows  you  to  use  “parts”  and 
knowledge to arrive at novelty and impact through an open-ended process 
that is not aimed in the slightest at getting you to a particular conclusion.

 *See  Michael  Schrage,  “Kits  and  revolutions:  An  MIT  economist’s  lesson  in  Kitonomics 
101,”  http://mambohead.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/Make_Ultimate_Kit_Guide.pdf.

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

179

The  innovation  prototyping  kit  exists  in  the  space  of  tools  and  even 
“movements” today that provide resources for individuals and organizations 
that promote knowledge self-sufficiency: the do-it-yourself and maker move-
ments,  the  hackerspace  movement,  a  variety  of  open-source  platforms  for 
technical  and  non-technical  tinkerers,  and  so  on.  Increasingly,  people  are  
trying  out  new  approaches  to  acquiring  knowledge,  distributing  ideas, 
achieving impact, and leveraging new distribution channels to bring ideas 
and innovations to scale more efficiently and broadly than in traditional 
channels. The innovation kit is part of that world.

How to build an innovation prototyping kit

When  you’re  done  constructing  your  innovation  prototyping  kit,  it  will 
comprise a hunch dressed as a problem, a set of accessible parts, pointers to 
impact, pointers to people, and a primer on how to work on the parts and the 
impact at scale. In my experience, it’s possible to build such a kit to seed the 
exploration of any kind of hunch with no more than a couple of pages of in-
formation and a few hundred dollars’ worth of parts.

It begins with the process I outline in chapters 2, 3, and 4. Beginning 

with a hunch:

1.  Consider what a solution must accomplish to solve the problem, and 
come up with a “recipe” that would allow you to verify that the problem 
is indeed solved. Try to resist the urge to come up with a solution at this 
point.
2.  Write a general problem statement that brings the two together.
Note that, contrary to your first intuition, the kit will be stronger the 
more general your problem. So, while you need to be precise in your asser-
tions, there is no need to be accurate at this stage.

180 

CHAPTER 6 

3.  Take a few seconds to imagine a few solutions that would, in your 
opinion, solve different versions of your problem. List them.
4.  Break your hypothetical solutions into components.
5.  For each of the parts, produce a brief explanation of how to use it and 
illustrate with examples of how each part models the kinds of impact 
you’ve articulated. Do the same for each kind of impact. Given the parts 
you’ve chosen, produce a brief explanation of how you would combine 
them to simulate each kind of impact at scale and what needs to be scaled up.
6.  Assemble your kit.
Let me comment on these last four steps together so you can see how a 

kit emerges.

The main purpose of listing a few imagined solutions for different ver-
sions of your problem is to inform your quest for parts, people, and examples 
of impact. The solutions need not be earth-shattering; in fact, they can be 
trivial. Nor is it necessary to flesh them out completely.

The solutions you identify need not even be new. Draw inspiration from 
things already done. At this stage, a solution could be something like “adding 
Y to what company X already does.” This list will also serve you as you seed 
the thinking of your innovators. It should inspire them to think creatively.

Having multiple imaginary solutions is most helpful—and the more dif-
ferent the imaginary solutions are, the better. It reinforces the open-ended 
nature of the task. Also, the more humorous and other worldly your “seeds,” 
the easier it will be for your innovators to embrace “being wrong.”

I find that using sci-fi books and movies to inspire some of these “seeds” 
tends to help achieve the objectives. Gene Roddenberry had flip phones in 
the original Star Trek series (mid 1960s), and characters in Star Trek: The 
Next Generation (late 1980s) carried around something that looked a lot like 
an iPad. In chapter 1, I mention  Johnny Chung Lee finding inspiration in the 
movie Minority Report. When Greenpeace established itself as a non-profit 
organization it decided to include the term “Foundation” in its name to hon-
or Isaac Asimov’s Foundation trilogy. Humans were first sent to the moon 

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

181

aboard a bullet-shaped rocket, as Jules Verne had written more than a hun-
dred years earlier in From the Earth to the Moon. 

Breaking  down  your  hypothetical  solutions  into  components  (step  4 
above) involves asking a number of questions. Which parts would help you 
simulate one of those solutions at table scale? Do not limit yourself to the 
physical parts, such as a micro-controller, some piping, or plaster. For in-
stance, if there is a regulatory component, how would you simulate that at 
table scale?

Given those components, whom would you ask for information about 

each?

What people or companies are currently producing similar solutions or 
addressing similar problems? Why? What makes those people or companies 
special given your problem?

Your answers to all the questions above tell you what parts, people, and 
examples of impact you will want to include in your kit. You will benefit 
most from being precise in answering the questions without worrying about 
being wrong—that is, you do not need to be accurate.

Producing the explanations called for in step 5 above keeps you focused 
on impact. Try to supply examples of use in which replacing one small part 
changes the mode of impact dramatically. For instance, if you are thinking 
about a combination of hardware and software for researchers, change the 
“user” part from “researcher” to “educator.” The former leads you to a termi-
nal market (research), whereas the latter guides you to a strategy to grow 
markets through academia that has been used by companies such as Math-
Works, Apple, and Facebook. You just changed one part.

When  you’re  ready  to  assemble  your  complete  kit,  it  will  include  the 

following:

•  a general problem statement (from steps 1 and 2)
•  a set of quick ideas innovators may see as examples of things that could 
lead to solutions (this can be inspired by step 3)
•  a set of parts, examples of impact, and a list of people or profiles of 
people who may know more about either (from step 4)

182 

CHAPTER 6 

•  a primer that illustrates how these parts may be used as illustrations of 
larger realities and how to break larger realities down for simulation with 
the parts you have (from step 5).
Just as the solutions in step 3 need not be earth-shattering, nothing about 
the kit is meant to be earth-shattering. You should view it as a beginning, a 
place to start. Much like your first pass at defining your problem, discussed 
in chapter 2, the kit is meant to provide some clarity regarding what your 
problem actually is. You are just giving a loose sense of direction to your in-
novators and inviting them to imagine—something they will have to do of-
ten as they set out to view how each part represents a larger reality.

If this all feels too oversimplified, it’s because it is indeed quite simple. 
The  rest—what  people  praise  as  creativity,  imagination,  the  “eureka  mo-
ment”—comes later, the result of playing with parts and impact to tame an 
imaginary problem into becoming real. Your innovators will provide that as 
they apply their creativity continuously to evolve the problem, empowered 
by a kit and enabled by the process you choose to implement. Or they won’t. 
One thing is certain: The kit will not create on its own.

Setting up a process for people to use innovation  
prototyping kits

When you bring a number of people around a hunch in this manner, the 
destination that gets shaped is a function of who they are and how their in-
terests  overlap—provided  the  problem  is  open-ended.  As  the  problem 
evolves, part of the job of the team using the kit is to move from that initial 
list of parts and people to one with new parts and new people whose input is 
most relevant to the evolving version of the problem. The challenge is to 
conceive of parts with which to demonstrate the problem that are commen-
surate with how well the people involved understand the problem today.

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

183

Three principles to follow: open-ended exploration, 

evolution through the combination of accessible 

parts and people, and challenging people to put 

the demonstration of value ahead of requesting 

sizable amounts of money.

There are three principles your process must follow: open-ended explo-
ration, evolution through the combination of accessible parts and people, 
and challenging people to put the demonstration of value ahead of request-
ing sizable amounts of money. Your job is to set up a process for innovating 
that enables that kind of inexpensive exploration, so that resources go to em-
powering the creativity that emerges from recombining parts for the purpose 
of defining a tangible compelling destination.

As your innovators evolve the problem, so too does the level of sophisti-
cation with which parts and people need to come together for impact. Soon 
they will need to think about an organization that solves a problem. The 
organization will need a specific set of resources to get started and to eventu-
ally solve the problem sustainably and systematically. When the team mem-
bers get there they will find themselves needing to advance their problem to 
a larger scale, and you will be ready to discuss next steps and value creation 
milestones.

That’s the outcome you seek. When teams are ready to advance to the 
next scale, they ought to be able to articulate a problem an organization can 
solve. They will be able to outline the way an organization can be put to-
gether incrementally to solve that problem, the resources needed, and the 
impact that ought to be expected from engaging in such an endeavor. By 

184 

CHAPTER 6 

then, their prototype will outline an organization, including where innova-
tion is needed. The prototype of the organization ought to make it easier to 
imagine the scale-up needs and to assess the risks and uncertainties that re-
main given their proposed plan of action.

I have implemented this approach successfully in classes and workshops. 
As long as you set a limit on the time that should be spent on any one inno-
vating project before reaching a decision on a destination and what needs to 
happen at the next scale-up stage, the process translates naturally to many 
other contexts. I discuss this in more detail in chapter 11.

When to consider producing an innovation prototyping kit

Working in just about any profession has a ready-made aspect. If you tell me 
you’re a chemist, I will imagine some tools of the trade such as beakers and 
solutions and Bunsen burners. If you tell me you’re an electrical engineer, I 
will imagine circuits, semiconductors, and oscilloscopes. If you tell me you’re 
a marketer, I will imagine messaging, product placement, and focus groups. 
Tell  me  you’re  a  lawyer  and  I  will  imagine  contracts,  negotiations,  and 
precedents.

So, I am an innovator. What do you imagine? If you imagine product 
placement and user surveys, you have me confused with a marketer. If you 
imagine beakers and solutions, you have me confused with a scientist.

As an innovator, the tools of your trade are problems, parts, and people. 
Sure, the parts may be shared with one of the professions above, but for you 
they derive purpose from the problem, not from some principle or endpoint 
presumed by the profession. The “kit” for an innovator ought to be an in-
strument for people to “use” parts and knowledge to arrive at novelty and 
impact.

People often associate innovation with patents and research papers. But 
patents as currently constituted are hardly a way to engage in trial and error 
as a path to innovation. They are legal tools that gain their full strength from 

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

185

their defensibility in court. Research papers are scientific tools that report 
findings that advance the state of the art and gain their full strength from 
their reproducibility. Much of the same could be said about scientific kits, 
development kits, product ideas, and other “tools” often associated with in-
novation. They all need translation to become usable for innovation.

Translation

There are several contexts in which an innovation prototyping kit offers a 
useful way forward.

Some organizations already produce development kits for their users 
to  build  upon  their  products.  Those  kits  tend  to  be  focused  around 
existing  products,  but  they  too  may  become  a  part  in  an  innovation 
prototyping  kit.  All  that  is  needed  is  to  augment  the  development  kit 
with additional parts and components selected to address one or a family 
of problems. As a matter of fact, this is an indirect way to innovate upon 
existing products—viewing them as parts of a larger system and, as such, 
subject to further evolution.

In an academic environment, a common problem is moving research 
beyond  scientific  papers—to  the  next  graduate  student  or  to  society. 
There is a lot of information that never makes it into the paper, and to an 
aspiring  entrepreneur  what’s  needed  is  not  the  specifics  of  the  results 
section and the challenge to reproduce those results but getting access to 
what the researchers learned along the way. An innovation prototyping 
kit may help overcome that obstacle. In the language of this book, the 
problems the authors of a paper spelled out in their grant application are 
hunches,  the  research  they  conducted  revealed  parts  they  used  to 
formulate that problem tangibly, and the results they obtained were new 
parts. Everything they learned could be encoded in a primer as variations 
one might introduce in the parts to explore different avenues of impact.

Finally, you could create innovation prototyping kits from intellectual 
property such as patents. At a high level, you may view patents as a legal 
instrument  to  enable  transfer  of  knowledge  about  new  inventions  to 
society—so society can build upon what’s discovered. Understood in that 

186 

CHAPTER 6 

way, patents are legal mechanisms that enable innovation while rewarding 
inventors for sharing their knowledge with society. But they are just that: 
legal  instruments,  contracts  with  society,  as  well  as  instruments  in 
litigation. As such, they are often criticized for stifling innovation.   
I choose to believe that if patents were easier to engage with it would be 
easier to appreciate the many ways in which several patents enable new 
inventions and applications that contribute to “increase the pie.” 
Innovation  prototyping  kits  may  become  such  vehicles  for  exper-
imentation.

I  believe  that  innovation  requires  significant  trial-and-error  work  on  
a problem—a kind of trial and error not afforded by patents or scientific 
papers or existing kits but perhaps afforded by innovation prototyping kits.

The logic of trial-and-error exploration that makes 

kits work defies linear thinking. The alternative—

that disruption comes only from dramatic changes 

—is terrifying.

 

A KIT TO DRIVE INNOVATION, ANYWHERE 

187

Takeaways

•  You could set out to harvest ideas, and thus postpone innovating, or you 
could  set  up  a  way  for anyone  to  start  innovating  right  away.  That’s  your 
choice.
•  Professional innovators need their own tools of the trade to operate on 
problems by working with parts and people. An innovation prototyping kit 
is one such tool. It’s easy to build. You can build one out starting from any-
thing—for example, a product idea, a hunch about a problem, a develop-
ment kit, a research paper, or a patent.
•  In essence, an innovation prototyping kit is an invitation to accept that 
innovations are not planned but rather emerge as you tackle a problem. That 
is, the actual innovations emerge from your efforts to combine parts and rea-
sonably accessible knowledge as you try and err about a problem.
•  You can get parts from a catalog or simulate them somehow; the knowl-
edge about those parts or about the problem you do not already possess re-
sides in other people. The problem that gives you purpose is a problem only 
if it has not been solved, so you ought to accept the fact that, as you go about 
understanding that problem, you’ll come up with something new.
•  You need something to empower your exploration, and it ought to consist 
of things that already exist. If you accept that the trial and error reveals the 
innovations needed, and that you can at the very least simulate their impact 
using other parts, there is no point in trying to plan a “great innovation” or 
culling innovation ideas from the get go. You can choose to focus on the 
problem and simply get started.
•  An  innovation  prototyping  kit  packages  a  hunch  about  a  problem  and 
helps others to get started.

188 

CHAPTER 6 

     7
7

operating on the problem 
through trial and error     

“Failing” sooner buys you time. The further along you are in scaling up, the 
more attention—time and money—fixing a failure demands. Better to spend 
your time and money failing earlier, when you can apply what you learn to 
make the next scale work. You need to stay at least one step ahead of your 
failures. You do that by striving to fail first at scale at which failure is indistin-
guishable from an error.

This is not an argument to postpone scale-up, nor more praise for “fail 
fast, fail cheap.” Rather, it is a reminder that mastering a problem takes prac-
tice and practicing implies making errors. You can let those errors find you 
when they do happen—and risk failing—or you can plan to make them, and 
learn.

So, you start by assuming you’ll fail to solve the problem that gives you 

purpose.

That problem is wrong. Let’s figure out how, so you can fix what’s wrong. 
That’s how you will solve for the problem and the problem itself. That’s what 
I mean in chapter 2 when I write that innovating is akin to a general kind of 
problem solving in which you discover both the problem and the solution as 
part of the process.

As you amass parts and insights from people, and you change, add, repur-
pose, or discard them (as described in chapters 3, 4, 5, and 6) your objective 
is to make them work together and to investigate how your problem is the 
wrong version to solve—and so you can find a better one.

How could your problem be wrong? At “best,” your problem lacks reso-
lution; at “worst,” your problem misses the point. The best way to find out is 
to try reproducing your problem. That’s what I call solving  for the problem.
What you are doing is reconfiguring your endeavor in a slightly different 
way. You are de facto building at one scale a proof of concept of what you will 
be able to accomplish at the next scale. When you land on the next scale, a 
proof of concept built in this way will buy you the time you need to address 
the new set of things that are only now apparent and that might make you 
fail at the next scale or the one after. This is how you layer proof of concept upon 
proof of concept.

“Failing” sooner 

buys you time and 

at scale is just  

an error.

Focusing  on  what  might  make 
you fail is not how we are typically 
told  to  think  about  achieving  the 
super-glamorous-hipster-entrepre-
neurial future that will make you a 
cool and famous innovator. But it is 
a good way to set you on a path to 
find  a  set  of  solutions  that  have 
chances  of  scaling  up  and  thus  are 
worth pursuing.

As you aim to achieve impact with your innovating, you need to find the 
“tough” questions to ask about your problem that will help you fail at the 
lowest possible cost. The tough questions are the ones that help you see how 

194 

CHAPTER 7

Mastering a problem takes practice and practicing 

implies making errors. You can let those errors find 

you when they do happen—and risk failing—or you 

can plan to make them, and learn.

being wrong can help you progress through scale. It can be helpful to think 
of all the ways your endeavor might be killed.

Consider the approach astronauts use to prepare for a space mission. In 
an October 2013 interview with National Public Radio, Canadian astronaut 
Chris  Hadfield  described  preparation  for  a  mission  to  the  International 
Space Station for an extended stay:

Half of the risk of a six-month flight is in the first nine minutes, so as a crew, 
how do you stay focused? How do you not get paralyzed by the fear of it? 
The way we do it is to break down: What are the risks? And a nice way to 
keep reminding yourself is: What’s the next thing that’s going to kill me? 
And it might be five seconds away, it might be an inadvertent engine shut-
down, or it might be staging of the solid rockets coming off. ... We don’t just 
live with that, though. The thing that is really useful, I think out of all of this, 
is we dig into it so deeply and we look at, “OK, so this might kill us, this is 
something that would normally panic us, let’s get ready, let’s think about it.” 
And we go into every excruciating detail of why that might affect what we’re 
doing and what we can do to resolve it and have a plan, and be comfortable 
with it. ... 1
The process Hadfield describes is a way to articulate, and gain a greater 
understanding of, just what’s needed to survive. His straightforward ques-
tion—“What’s the next thing that’s going to kill me?”—summarizes the rela-
tionship the astronaut has with the rocket, the mission, and life itself. It helps 

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

195

prepare the astronaut to overcome anything that might kill the mission. And 
it’s relatively simple because it pushes the astronauts to search for certainty, 
which may come either in the form of a protocol of action or a request to 
change something in the rocket or the mission.

The approach Hadfield describes asks questions that have definite out-
comes, and with which astronauts can begin to expand their understanding 
of the mission and the rocket. It might play out like this: If problem X mani-
fests itself, we have 5 seconds to fix it before the rocket blows up. But we 
know we need 20 seconds to fix it, so if problem X happens, we die—unless 
we can somehow modify physics (i.e., engineer something) to give us the 
extra time or we find a way to fix it in less time.

It’s morbid, to be sure, but also remarkably straightforward. And it in-
forms the entire endeavor. Perhaps there’s a relatively simple fix, such as add-
ing a sensor or using different piping on the rocket. Perhaps the solution is 
more complex and requires a different engineering design.

This is actually about understanding the problem, not “solving” it per 
se—even if a solution eventually emerges. There is a problem: getting to the 
space station. There is a vehicle (literally) for solving the problem: a rocket. 
There is a plan of action: the prototype the astronauts question over and 
over, with their questions focused on what might lead to their deaths.

You can use the same approach Hadfield describes to fail at scale and 
avoid dying. If the event that would have otherwise killed the mission hap-
pens, you’ll be prepared. You gain a full understanding of your problem and 
the way you think you will solve it. With that understanding, you can ad-
vance to each new scale. Resolve that if the overall mission does end up fail-
ing, it will be because of something you could not have known or predicted.
The non-astronaut in you may have applied a similar logic under much 
more mundane circumstances—say, planning a trip to a warmer destination. 
You may have created a checklist of everything you thought you needed to 
do or pack before leaving. Your checklist included a swimming suit, but be-
cause you wanted to travel light you wondered whether you should instead 
buy a swimming suit at your destination.

196 

CHAPTER 7

How did you decide whether to pack your swimming suit? You tried to 
figure out what would “kill” the trip. If you decided not to take one, and your 
hypothesis that swimming suits would be available to buy when you got there 
was wrong, your trip would be a disaster. So you tried to validate your hy-
pothesis by asking friends who had been where you were going whether there 
is a local swimming suit store. But a lot could still go wrong. If the store is 
closed the day you arrive, you might lose a day of swimming; your size suit 
could be out of stock; maybe the styles and colors available are so odious to 
you that you couldn’t bring yourself to wear one.

In the end, maybe you decided to pack your swimming suit after all, to 
avoid those possibilities that could “kill” your trip. Of course, you don’t know 
whether it might rain the entire time you are there, ruling out swimming  
altogether, and in the end all your thinking may not have mattered. You throw 
your hands up, exasperated at the prospect of rain, and make your decision 
not to bring or buy a swimming suit on the basis of no information at all. 
That’s your minimum viable “product”—not doing a thing.

On Externalities and Not Doing a Thing

An all too common way to misapply the logic of being wrong leads to 
rejecting perfectly valid ideas on the basis of having no information. My 
swimming example makes this apparent: you imagine rain, throw your 
hands up, and give up on swimming altogether.

It is preposterous to make a decision by relying only on statistics (say, 
about  others’  trips)  or  on  a  suspicion  that  something  ominous  could 
happen. Yet I see people apply this reasoning repeatedly.

The faulty logic goes more or less as follows: You imagine something is 
possible. You try to imagine things that might go wrong. You come up 
with one, claim victory, and decide that what you first imagined cannot 
be done. Thus, you have “proven” it was impossible. It’s the perfect self-
fulfilling prophecy: “I will not do it, and hence it does not get done.”

You  forgot  you  were  supposed  to  find  evidence.  By  instead  letting 
everything happen in your head, you kept alive the myth of the impos-
sibility of it all.

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

197

Aspiring innovators inadvertently use this faulty reasoning to discard 
perfectly valid ideas. After a while, proving “the impossibility of it all,” 
they  settle  for  ambitionless  ideas  that  create  the  illusion  of  clarity 
because they are copycats of something someone else is already 
doing or be cause they are problems already solved. Or maybe they 
settle because they were simply tired of throwing their hands up 
over  having  to  throw  their  hands  up—and  so  they  throw  their 
hands up.

For  example,  people  tasked  with  finding  information  from 
other people will persuade themselves no one is available to answer 
their questions, and so they don’t even try. Later they argue that 
not  trying  is  evidence  there  really  was  no  one  to  be  found.  I 
congratulate  them:  truly  the  best  way  to  persuade  yourself 
something is impossible is to try really hard not to do anything.

Often, student teams come up with ideas to apply some new 
technology in, for example, a health care setting. Initial enthusiasm 
usually  gives  way  to  getting  hung  up  on  the  belief  that  some 
regulation  will  make  the  idea  too  difficult  or  expensive  to 
implement. Then they give up; a decision is made with no actual 
information.  I  explain  to  them  that  regulation  might  also  make 
things easier, and that they will only know by trying to find out. 
After  all,  regulation  provides  the  equivalent  of  a  standard  they 
don’t have to develop on their own.

Back to the checklist for your trip, which is probably based on your expe-
riences. Each trip you take informs your planning for the next one, helping 
you create a checklist of things to do, questions to ask, and things to pull to-
gether here and there. That checklist defines your problem indirectly by all 
the things you can imagine might go wrong and that you want to head off at 
the pass.

My examples of a mission to the International Space Station and traveling 
to a warmer destination illustrate two extreme scenarios in which you advance 
toward success by making it your purpose to negate that the idea might suc-
ceed. A third example will help show the mind-set underlying this method of 

198 

CHAPTER 7

interrogating an idea. Say you are about to embark on a trip to Brazil, your 
very first foreign trip. You can play the trip out in your head. You arrive at the 
airport in Rio de Janeiro, show your passport, and are informed that you also 
need a visa. Entry to Brazil is denied, you have to take a plane back to where 
you started from, and your trip is “killed.”

If you had created a checklist of what you think you need to bring or do, 

you would add “visa” to it, next to “passport.”

Now you’re focusing on what might “kill” your trip. Perhaps your trip in-
cludes travel to a remote part of Amazonia. There, you may run out of reals, 
and discover that you are prohibitively far from anywhere you can get more 
cash. Since cash is vital to continuing on, your trip again is “killed.” You’ll 
probably add “extra cash” to the checklist; you might also add “short-term 
job” to your trip plan, too.

On each imaginary version of your trip, you learn something new that 
matters for success, and in so doing you create an increasingly more detailed 
checklist.

Your  checklist  moves  you  forward,  but  the  only  way  to  know  if  your 
checklist includes everything it needs to include is by moving backward—
specifically, trying out a checklist, getting “killed,” and going backward (in a 
sense) to create a new checklist based on your failure and what you learned 
from that failure. Eventually, the checklist has grown into a plan.

Surely your experience will change as you go, and unanticipated externali-
ties will reveal themselves. The practice you acquired negating your trip will 
help you identify those externalities as things you could not have easily pre-
dicted when you were working at scale. It will also prepare you to learn from 
them.

As far as the problem you’re working on is concerned, you need to make it 
a routine to ask questions that involve definite outcomes. Some of the answers 
will be things you know; other information you’ll have to search for, and may-
be ask others. The decision of what to do, however, is ultimately yours, as are 
the trip and the experience, and as would be the failures.

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

199

The Rationale for the Trip Examples

Using trips as the examples here conveys that what matters is experiencing 
a trip for the reality it offers, not for everything that could have easily 
been prevented. The reality that will shape your innovating lies ahead, 
and things can look quite different before and after your journey.

The exercise of negating your idea does more than help you anticipate 
disaster and prepare you to execute on a plan. It forces you to think about 
your  idea  in  terms  of  strategies  that  increase  your  resilience  and 
determination to get through the entire journey. When reality hits, you 
may  not  have  anticipated  some  specific  thing,  but  you  will  be  more 
prepared to react.

As I wrote in chapters 1 and 2, all of this makes it harder to dissociate 
conceiving from execution while you are innovating—in foresight—than 
it  is  when  you  are  looking  backward  on  the  path  you  followed—in 
hindsight.

In  the  examples  in  this  chapter,  “knowing  it  all”  ahead  of  time  is 
impossible, impractical, or simply pointless. What matters is being ready 
to face the reality ahead. You may find in your own experience situations 
in which you defaulted to a similar mind-set—knowingly or not. Think 
about  situations  in  which  you  have  found  yourself  working  through 
changes to an idea powered by nothing but a feeling that something isn’t 
quite right.

You  can  use  that  intuitive  mind-set  as  a  verification  recipe  of  sorts. 
Indeed, it is the best metric to figure out whether you should continue 
working on something. If your problem does not compel you to adopt 
this mind-set, you can give up on the problem now. Since you don’t really 
care about it, you might as well spare yourself some agony.

You need to make sure you introduce into that routine the same kind of 
existential anguish the question about getting killed supplies the astronauts. 
It isn’t enough to get some confirmatory evidence or validate your ideas; you 
need to verify every aspect of your problem you can think of.

200 

CHAPTER 7

Validate or verify?

The  English  word  “validate”  comes  from  the  Latin  validus,  meaning 
“strong,” and is used to imply the gathering of evidence that makes your 
logic reasonable or cogent. “Verify” comes from the Latin veritas, meaning 
“truth.”

You may have grown accustomed to using these words interchangeably, 
but they imply very different burdens of proof. A few confirmatory pieces 
of  evidence  can  suffice  to  validate  just  about  anything,  even  if  it  is 
knowably wrong. Conversely, you can never verify anything fully a priori. 
Say  you  want  to  verify  the  existence  of  customers.  The  proof  lies  in 
whether or not people buy. That lives at another scale, and when you get 
to it the question will no longer matter.

You verify by trying as hard as you can to prove the assertion wrong. 
When it persists in surviving, you begin to persuade yourself there is some 
truth to it. You should, nonetheless, keep on trying to prove whatever 
remains wrong as you progress through scale-up.

By contrast, to validate an assertion you need only gather evidence that 
suggests the statement is reasonable. Feel free to validate, but know that 
this might only lead you to finding out you are wrong later, when being 
wrong is more expensive.

You  may  have  heard  this  phenomenon  referred  to  as  “confirmation 
bias.”  In  truth,  that  bias  is  just  a  by-product  of  the  experimental  logic 
implied  in  validating.  “Validate”  and  “verify”  imply  very  different 
experimental  logics.  For  the  purpose  of  innovating,  validate  implies  a 
useless (and, in the long term, expensive) set of mental operations. It is 
useless  because  no  one  cares  about  your  “reasonable”  statements;  they 
want rock-solid ones.

If you go on simply validating, later rather than sooner things that are 
false will prove to have been reasonable. At that point, the best you can 
hope for is that a leprechaun will emerge from behind a rainbow with a 
pot of gold and show you the magical change in direction you need to 
take. It will be unplanned, unintentional, and serendipitous, but it will 
most certainly be welcome.

These kinds of pivots work best with leprechauns.

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

201

As Hadfield explains,
[Y]ou have to practice and learn what’s the right thing to do. But given that, 
it actually gives you a really great comfort. It’s counterintuitive, you know, to 
visualize disaster, but by visualizing disaster, that’s what keeps us alive.
It is indeed counterintuitive. But it’s not difficult to do; it is, in fact, far 
easier to do than it is to confirm that your approach to a problem is correct. 
The kind of mental operations Hadfield’s description of the astronauts’ pro-
cess or my trip example illustrate can keep your problem alive and evolving.

Resolve that your “mission” will fail only in ways 

no one could have predicted. Approach it like the 

astronauts and “fail” at scale to avoid dying. 

You can keep your problem alive and evolving by working backward from 
the problem being solved, posing questions, and trying to answer them by 
bringing parts and people together (either parts and people you “have” or 
you need to get)—in other words, prototyping your problem. Each time you 
do this, you will end up producing a kind of checklist of things that either 
have to be true or cannot possibly be true at the next scale. That checklist is, 
in fact, a plan. It is your best cue that there might actually be something to 
what you’re doing—in other words, that you’re on the right track.

What makes this endeavor somewhat counterintuitive is that instead of 
following a recipe to solve the problem like a robot, you have to trust that a 
solution will emerge from systematically negating the problem to come up 
with a better one. You need to engage in the kind of critical thinking that is 
a staple of heuristic techniques—that is, the process of gaining knowledge or 
some desired result by intelligent “guesswork” rather than by following some 

202 

CHAPTER 7

You evolve your problem—work backward, pose 

questions—and end up with a checklist of things 

that must be or can’t possibly be true at the next 

scale.

pre-established formula. As I have learned in my teaching (and as I summa-
rize in chapters 1 and 2), when it comes to innovating, not only is the alterna-
tive to heuristics—a form of robotic comparison ripe for a randomized con-
trol trial, such as the call for ideas I describe in chapter 6—impractical; it 
lacks  power  to  overcome  nonlinearity,  and  it  mires  you  in  hindsight 
thinking.

All you need to do is devise a process of questions that leads you into ac-
tively and tangibly fixing what you find is wrong with your problem. Talking 
to other humans or assembling parts, managing, and so on emerge as a con-
sequences of trying to disprove that a problem that you assume solved is ac-
tually solved.

An inventory of the problem
In other chapters, I have had you assemble parts in a way you think you can 
emulate  your  problem.  Here  you’re  going  to  try  deliberately  to  make  the 
problem not work. Making your problem not work is, in fact, the only way to 
ensure that you cover the entire space within which your problem sits.

The questions outlined in other chapters lead you to an initial innova-
tion  prototype.  That  innovation  prototype  may  have  emerged  from  your 
first attempt at assembling parts and insights from people, it may be what’s 
left  from  previous  iterations,  or  it  may  have  come  out  of  an  innovation 

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

203

prototyping kit you were given. Whatever the case, that innovation proto-
type represents a problem and should answer the following high-level ques-
tions that help make your problem more tangible:

•  Can I reproduce the problem? Would I recognize a solution?
•  What does impact look like? How would people encounter my solu-
tion? How would their lives change from using my solution? Can I pro-
totype that impact?
•  Would I be able to go over my prototype and explain the way in which 
people encounter it, the way in which it gets to them, and the benefit I 
claim they’ll derive from it, or did I just prototype some gizmo? (This is 
a sort of “sanity check” question.)
•  What is wrong about this problem?
•  How can I fix it?
With  this  innovation  prototype  in  hand,  your  best  bet  is  to  take  for 
granted that this is indeed a scaled-down demonstration of a problem that 
can be solved and assume it will not work. That is, imagine all the ways in 
which it will not work so you can go on and figure out what will.

As you proceed through the next set of questions, you may discover that 
the  problem  you  set  out  to  solve  is  wrong  in  many  more  ways  than  you 
thought. As discussed in chapter 2, this may lead you to having to find a more 
accessible problem or an easier problem to solve first. The questions you pose 
to yourself and the answers you get from parts, scale, and people should al-
low you to do that.

You may end up with not just one but multiple, distinct versions of the 
problem you set out to solve. That’s good; it would lead you to identify the 
kind of space of opportunity I discuss in chapter 5. Your objective isn’t to 
solve the problem; it is to progress through an increasingly robust sequence 
of proofs of concept in an ever-widening and increasingly robust space of 
opportunity. As a matter of fact, interrogating your problem is a good way to 
outline what you aim to accomplish. I come back to this point at the end of 
this chapter.

204 

CHAPTER 7

A process of questions

In the example given above, the astronauts knew they were being successful 
if certainty came in the form of a new protocol or a request to change some-
thing. Similarly, you know you are being successful if your line of inquiry 
leads you to a new set of parts or a new set of people to talk to—that is, to a 
new set of “truths” about your innovating for which you need to create evi-
dence. You may call these truths a set of hypotheses and experiments, but 
what’s important is the certainty you seek to acquire about an aspect of your 
problem.

The questions you have to pose to yourself gain their power from the 
existence of a tangible demonstration of the problem. Absent a prototype, 
they may appear abstract. So, every time a question refers to a this or a that, 
you have to force yourself to imagine you are pointing to something in your 
innovation prototype. Conversely, if when posing one of these questions of 
your prototype you find nothing to point to, you know right then that your 
prototype is incomplete and/or that it is time to revisit an assumption.

Challenge what you think you’ve learned.  

Broaden your proof of concept. You may end up 

with multiple versions of your problem—a space  

of opportunity. 

You should ask questions about your knowns and unknowns that broad-
en your inquiry, explore proofs of concept, and challenge what you think 
you’ve learned. They should concern the problem as a whole. Their purpose 
is  to  help  you  begin  a  line  of  inquiry  about  what  you  actually  have 

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

205

demonstrated so you can demonstrate something else—the next something. 
Questions ought to point to actions—that is, interacting with parts or inter-
facing with people—that you might take to answer them. The actions are 
what lead you to definite answers or, more precisely, to things you can check 
off. (“Do I have my passport? Check!”)

What follows are some examples of questions that emerge from other 
chapters. This is not an exhaustive list. You will figure out many of your own 
questions based on the problem you’re working on and what you learn along 
the way.

As I explain in chapter 2, you can count on being wrong with your cur-
rent best guess about each of the things you do not yet know about your 
problem. You can, with near certainty, count on your imagined solution be-
ing wrong, and with high likelihood that your vision of what ought to be 
accomplished and how you’ll verify a solution are also wrong. You can start 
your inquiry here:

•  Can I imagine a way the problem may be solved that this verification 
rule would miss?
•  Why is this solution I imagine not solving the problem?

Asking these questions of an early prototype may be difficult, so it may help 
to negate further what you have built by prompting your questions with any 
of the following:

•  Why would anyone care about accomplishing that?
•  Assuming the problem is solved, what is still missing if people are to 
accomplish what you foresaw? (This is a tricky question. The kind of 
answer you are looking for is the “such and such” in the following state-
ment: “People will accomplish what you foresaw only if such and such is 
also true.”)
•  Something about this problem is not quite right. Can I play it out? 
That is, can I simulate the problem being solved?

206 

CHAPTER 7

These are all different approaches to a more fundamental pair of questions:

•  Is this even a problem?
•  If not, what is?

The second of those two may seem silly, but only until you ask it in this 
context.

These questions may get you started on a line of inquiry that reveals what 
you know and don’t yet know about your problem given what you have pro-
totyped. You need to sort what you don’t know into what you can address 
now and what you’ll have to assume to be one way or another for now and 
test later at a larger scale.

•  Is that unknown important only because I imagine eventually solving 
a problem that affects lots of people?
•  What remains unknown if I solve the problem for only one person?
As you progress, you ought to be able to recognize some of those un-
knowns as pointing to a need for new evidence—that is, data and conditions 
that you only now understand that you need.

•  What do I need to be true for that thing to be also true at scale?
•  What data can I obtain to show that it will not work?
Other unknowns are more difficult to formulate, so you may need to 
make them go away for now by modifying your problem, either by focusing 
on a piece of the problem or by taking your problem down to a scale at which 
the unknown is not an issue for now.

•  What do I actually need to know now?
•  What do I know how to solve, or can explain, with data, parts, or in-
sights I have now? (Note that this ought to reveal the scale at which the 
unknown does not exist.)
•  Can I make this  smaller or larger in some way to overcome that 
unknown?

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

207

You need questions that will push you to consider everything you learn 
from parts or people as an auxiliary element (some of these questions appear 
in chapters 3 and 4). This allows you to focus your endeavor on developing 
partial proofs of concept—that is, on identifying combinations of parts and 
insights from people that together constitute proof of something, even if 
that something is only one of the many things you’ll eventually need to be 
true.

You may begin to ask the following questions of every part and insight 
that has made it into your prototype. When interrogating your prototype at 
this level, it is useful to assume routinely that what you have is a near miss—
that is,  one small modification away from what it needs to be.

•  What does this part or insight do for my prototype? Why is it needed? 
Can I remove it? What doesn’t it yet do? What does this look like at a 
larger scale?
•  What did I have to assume to use this part or insight? Is it still true?

You can then go on to explore combinations of parts and insights:

•  What do parts A and B and or insights C and D represent when to-
gether? What do I need to know, add, or find out, so that they work to-
gether? What has to be true for them to work together? What other 
parts might I need?
You can achieve a lot by assuming that the outcome of putting things 
together isn’t quite right even when it appears to be working. One way to 
reason your way into what else might be achievable is by posing questions 
that lead to new or changed parts and insights, which essentially amount to 
enhanced specifications:

•  What part or insight do I have to remove or add to attain another spe-
cific outcome?
•  Which part is not yet doing what I would need it to do at this scale?
•  I might be able to trace a given outcome back. What is each part or 
insight really contributing?

208 

CHAPTER 7

Remember, in the context of this book a part is anything that is not a 
person. So, a business model (and its components) is a part, as is an imagined 
user (an archetype, a persona, or whatever). And you can operate on the in-
sights you get from interfacing with people much as you do with parts. You 
should make parts and insights the subject of the same kind of inquiry you 
would any other aspect of your innovating, and assume they are but a place-
holder for something else.

You need questions that facilitate coming up with the near misses with 
which to seize nonlinearities as opportunities (some these questions appear 
in chapter 5). So, as you go over your working innovation prototype you may 
make  a  point  of  modifying  it  by  introducing  radically  distinct  parts  and 
insights.

•  Looking at a specific component of your innovation prototype, ask 
these questions: What happens if I add a radically new part here? Re-
move this part? Modify the prototype to account for this insight?
A similarly unassuming line of inquiry may have led Edison to add a thin 
plate and then observe current flowing in one direction. The last set of ques-
tions seems to set you on a random search. It doesn’t, though, because you are 
a highly evolved pattern-recognition machine. You’ll find it difficult not to 
start seeing patterns that guide your search. Indeed, you are entrusting the 
search to your ability to recognize patterns. Even Edison’s search was direct-
ed in that he focused on adding things inside the light bulb, first in lieu of the 
filament and then together with the filament.

You can follow a similar line of inquiry, looking at groups of parts and 

insights that seem to work together:

•  What other parts or insights may this group work on as well?
•  What if we assume this insight we took for granted is wrong? What 
should we change? What other thing might need to be true?
After you explore how to modify what you have built, you can ask about 

what you then have:

•  What does this innovation prototype now do?

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

209

•  What problem or problems is this a scaled-down version of? In what 
way(s)?
•  Is this problem different from the one I started with? What specific 
change caused it to be different?
•  What experiment or new set of parts or insights would I need to show 
that it will not work?
Whatever you are doing now, the result will be only a first semi-working 
prototype, and you’ll need questions that help you synthesize what you have 
learned. That’s a first step toward organizing the results of your exploration 
systematically so you can address increasingly larger versions of your prob-
lem—that is, toward systematizing your innovating, which I discuss in part 
III of the book. You can ask: 

•  What in my prototype suggests that this is an actual problem (solvable, 
recognizable, and verifiable)?
•  What do I think I know about my problem? Can I inventory the in-
sights and the large-scale reality captured by my prototype?
•  How is it that my parts, working together, suggest the problem might 
be solved?
You know from earlier in this chapter that your main purpose is not to 
use these questions to find a solution to your initial problem, but to use them 
to identify ways to demonstrate that your first problem is wrong and thus 
find a better version.

The questions above should lead you to identify strategies you can use to 
modify your innovation prototype and make it represent different, larger re-
alities. Your answers to those questions should point to a need for new parts 
or new insights with which to acquire new certainties about several aspects 
of your initial problem. The way you come up with one or several versions of 
your problem is to discard your initial formulation of the problem altogether 
and instead examine what these changes tell you about the things you now 
know how to do and the things you feel need to be demonstrated.

210 

CHAPTER 7

•  What  have  I  learned  about  the  problem?  Can  I  make  the  problem 
simpler?
•  Are  there  patterns  to  the  variations  I  applied  to  my  innovation 
prototype?
•  Can I group the experiments or next actions in some way? By parts? By 
aspects changed? By problem?
•  What “questions” or “truths” continue to resist my attempts at proving 
them wrong? (Note that these may be the innovating equivalent to what 
scale-up engineers, control engineers, chemical engineers, and physicists 
call “invariants,” “dimensionless numbers,” “poles,” etc.)
•  Can I distill a new set of distinct problems from how I may group the 
next set of actions for my innovating?
Your objective is to define that space of opportunity (described in chap-
ter 5) that may be covered by changing aspects of the problem you solve. In 
effect, what you are doing is searching through a space—exploring. You are 
successful in your exploration if the process of questions above leads you not 
to just one solution, but to understand the structure of the space of opportu-
nity tied to that initial hunch. That understanding should translate into a 
family of diverse problems you can now explain in terms of near misses—
that is, explain each distinct problem as a consequence of seemingly small 
changes to the set of parts that helped prototype some other problems. When 
one of those externalities that become apparent only at a larger scale presents 
itself, your understanding of the space around the problem that gives you 
purpose will make it easier to change aspects of what you are doing to  
circumvent the externality.

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

211

Your space of opportunity will have multiple opportunities, multiple ways to 
get to them, and multiple starting points. You have no way to know which 
opportunity is best without exploring. You chart your exploration so that the 
starting point does not constrain where you end up and you do not prema-
turely reject any opportunity.

Progress?

You know that you are progressing if at any point you realize that your prob-
lem is not worth pursuing, that the space of opportunity is smaller than you 
thought, or that someone else already solved the problem.

You  also  know  you  are  progressing  if  your  inquiry  evolves  somewhat 
gradually from a quest for parts into a quest for ways to make parts and in-
sights work together and then into a quest for strategies to systematize what 
you have learned about your problem so you can serve a solution at a large 
scale.  You  also  know  you  are  progressing  if  after  a  while  you  realize  your 
problem was not really a problem.

212 

CHAPTER 7

Progress comes from learning, realizing that your 

problem is not worth pursuing, or concluding that 

your problem was really not a problem.

Somewhere  along  that  progression  you’ll  realize  that  “execution”  has 
overtaken “sensing.” Exactly when that might have happened is hard to tell 
precisely  in  foresight;  you  can,  however,  arbitrarily  pick  any  time  in 
hindsight.

The set of questions I propose here is consistent with my presentation of 
innovating in other chapters. As you progress in your endeavor, you may find 
some questions more useful than others or come up with variants on these 
questions that are more adapted to the way you think. As you become skilled, 
you’ll likely find that you need only ask yourself a few of the following ques-
tions to trigger your process:

•  What needs to be true? What did I assume to be true?
•  What if I added this or that? Or what if this or that was possible?
•  Is this or that actually known to be impossible? Or is the impossibility 
just a by-product of how we think about it all?
•  What do I need to put together—parts and insights—to show it all 
will not work?

Or you may come up with an alternate set of questions altogether that suits 
your own background.

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

213

General Attributes of Questions

The  kinds  of  questions  you  need  to  ask  yourself  have  a  number  of 

general attributes:

•  They may appear to be very abstract if you don’t have a tangible 
version of a problem, yet they are incredibly definite when posed 
about an innovation prototype. You have to force yourself to 
imagine that you are pointing to something in your innovation 
prototype.
•  They ought to make it easy for you to imagine new truths—that 
is, things you  do not yet know to be false. The point is to prove 
them wrong yourself through inquiry or through new 
combinations of parts. That’s how questions can help you venture 
into an entire new space of opportunity.
•  They ought to help you identify near misses.
•  They ought to help you imagine variants to the problem.
•  They ought to help you imagine scenarios under which your 
entire endeavor will be rejected. The point is to prepare yourself to 
translate the “you are wrong” answer you’ll get as you converse 
with people and parts into a new set of tangible actions or 
combinations.
•  They ought to introduce the same kind of existential anguish 
the question about getting killed supplies the astronauts.

Updating the problem and the innovation prototype through 
questions

As you interrogate your prototype, the answers you get from parts and peo-
ple accrue into your prototype. Your innovation prototype should gradually 
reveal your increasingly sophisticated understanding of the problem. With 
your prototype, you ought to be able to explain tangibly the spectrum that 
spans from how parts should work together to how people encounter the 
problem and to how people stand to benefit from it being solved.

214 

CHAPTER 7

Your innovation prototype should gradually reveal 

your increasingly sophisticated understanding of 

the problem.

As  you  continue  to  find  ways  in  which  your  idea  is  wrong,  however,  
questions either will point to a need for new certainties or will reveal large 
unknowns that you may have to assume as externalities at this scale—though 
they may be addressable at a larger scale.

As your questions become more sophisticated, it may eventually become 
increasingly impractical to find ways to address them with the resources you 
have at this scale. As that happens, it should become increasingly easier to 
define what needs to be put together next (what parts and what kind of peo-
ple) to pursue the “certainties” you can pursue only when you consider the 
problem at the next scale.

You can use all this information to update your innovation prototype. 

You begin by taking an inventory of what you have:

•  a set of parts and insights you obtained from people working together 
and that illustrate something that may be possible at a larger scale
•  a notion of how changes to those parts and those insights modulate 
the problem you want solve
•  a number of questions posed and certainties that emerged from those 
questions about things that are wrong and about things that refuse to 
allow themselves to be proven wrong
•  a number of questions posed and the unknowns they revealed, as well 
as the assumptions you had to make until later in the scale up when you 
would be able to revisit the questions

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

215

•  new questions emerging from what you learned (things that may be 
possible given the new certainties you acquired) that you may answer 
with parts and people accessible at a larger scale
•  several refinements of the problem that gives you purpose.

This is now your innovation prototype. You can summarize it in a different 
way  by  transforming  everything  you’ve  learned  into  a  set  of  logical  state-
ments that help you capture the possibilities you’ve encountered:

•  If A is possible/true, so is B.

or

or

•  For A to be true, B and C must meet condition X.

•  After eliminating A, B, C ways in which X was to be proven wrong, we 
are left with D. Either D makes X wrong, or we need to find something 
that will.

and so on. These statements should all be based on the evidence you’ve gath-
ered from parts and people or on the explicit assumptions you had to make. 
You have to work hard to make sure nothing is implicit. 

With this you can try to restate your problem in a slightly different way: 
in terms of the space of opportunity it creates. You may assume your hunch 
really pointed to a space of opportunity and try teasing out several distinct 
problems—new problem opportunities—that span that space.

Each new problem should have the structure of a problem and should be 
supported  by  different  aspects  of  your  innovation  prototype—as  if  com-
posed of partial proofs of concept, parts, people, certainties, and unknowns. 
The new problems should be sufficiently distinct from one another so you 
can imagine them as resulting in altogether different solutions, but should 
overlap in that they all emerge from the same logical chain of possibility you 
outlined.  When  you  progress  to  the  next  scale,  every  new  certainty  you  

216 

CHAPTER 7

Your questions should expand your initial hunch 

into a space of opportunity represented not by 

just one but by several distinct problems you can 

address.

acquire will translate into a certainty for one or more of those problems. As 
you continue to prove things wrong, you can think of recombining these 
problems into something different based on evidence.

Together, these new problems define and span the space of opportunity. 
Rather than pick one to focus on, you ought to determine the next set of 
experiments and actions that will give you the most information about the 
entire space of opportunity. You should choose the actions that will demon-
strate soonest that the space is not worth pursuing as well as the actions that 
will give you the most information about the way in which the space might 
be  interesting.  Those  actions  constitute  your  logical  chain  of  possibility. 
That is how you plan to explore and seize the space of opportunity.

The space of opportunity is the next refinement of your problem, and 
the sum of certainties and new experiments is the next evolution of your  
innovation prototype.

 

OPERATING ON THE PROBLEM THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR 

217

Takeaways

•  Figuring out how to show that your problem is wrong is, in essence, how 
you work your way through innovating. As in the astronauts’ preparation for 
a mission to the International Space Station, you ought to work through 
your innovation prototype trying to imagine the next thing that will “kill” 
your mission.
•  The questions in this chapter allow you to get started innovating by as-
suming that you’ll fail. As you become more skilled at innovating, you will 
make it a routine to assume that your prototype will not work, and to go 
systematically through all the parts and insights that make up your proto-
type—those you are using and those you are not using—to prove that it will 
indeed not work. That is, you search for a culprit that would turn an error at 
this scale into a failure at the next scale. 
•  You do that by interrogating your prototype with parts and with insights 
you get from people. Along the way, you may discover a few things that resist 
your attempts at proving them wrong. Throughout your search, you’ll come 
to  understand  that  these  things  transform  your  hunch  into  a  space  of 
opportunity.
•  As you become accustomed to this mind-set, you ought to find it easier to 
add new parts and insights that you don’t believe will work together and 
pose the same questions you would for the ones you suspected will work. A 
near miss is a near miss, whether by accident or by design. All near misses 
carry information.
•  This is how you commandeer nonlinearities and make your innovating 
robust. Your objective is to build a space of opportunities represented as a set 
of problems you can explain in terms of modifications to your innovation 
prototype. The strategies you come up with to answer tangibly the questions 
your prototyping raises become your plan.

218 

CHAPTER 7

iii

organizing what  
you have learned  

Exploring Impact

in part ii, i told you about parts, people, explor-
ing through nonlinearities, and “packaging” a hunch into a kit. I 
offered  examples  of  questions  you  might  ask  along  the  path  to 
help you find new ways to bring them all together to solve for a 
problem. The difficult thing to swallow might be that I have au-
thorized you, indeed even asked you, to be productively wrong 
and not to limit yourself to just a product but rather to dare to 
explore seemingly preposterous ideas.

If you need some extra confirmation that there is nothing bad 
about being wrong and pursuing a seemingly preposterous idea, 
consider the three laws of prediction established by Sir Arthur C. 
Clarke (1917–2008), the great British science writer—both fiction 
and nonfiction—and futurist. The first two state:

1.  When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that some-
thing is possible, he is almost certainly right. When he states that 
something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.
2.  The only way of discovering the limits of the possible is to 
venture a little way past them into the impossible.1
However, there is a problem both in my explanation in part II 
and in these two laws themselves: They set you up in an infinite 

224 

PRELUDE

loop. Worse, although most innovation ideas begin as preposter-
ous, not all preposterous ideas graduate into becoming real. (There 
are numerous books on the subject of patents that never became 
anything  tangible.)  There  is  no  guarantee  that  your  idea  will 
graduate.

It gets worse. No method tells you how to figure out when it’s 
time to stop “iterating,” whether your idea will graduate from be-
ing preposterous but possible to becoming probable and doable, 
or even whether you’ll be the one to graduate your idea.

Clarke’s third law gets you out of the infinite loop by postulat-
ing that at some point the elderly scientist from the first law will 
concede that you’ve conjured your way around the “impossible”:

3.  Any  sufficiently  advanced  technology  is  indistinguishable 
from magic.
Back to innovating: You begin and end with a problem. There’s 
your infinite loop. If you keep going, don’t expect there to be a big, 
bright, red stoplight. Nothing you do will reveal an exact stopping 
point. To be sure, you are not a robot or a slave. Stopping is a deci-
sion you make, and you can stop at any time. You might pass your 

 

PRELUDE 

225

innovating on to the next person as, say, an innovation prototyp-
ing kit. If you do keep going, your way out of the infinite loop is to 
grow.

As you learn, you hope to find ways to simplify what you’ve 
already done so that doing it again (should that be necessary) takes 
less effort. That’s how you grow. Simplifying frees you to approach 
the problem that gives you purpose at its rightful scale.

Put another way, you set out to organize the outcomes of your 
exploration  systematically  so  your  exploration  takes  less  effort 
(measured in money, time, and or skills) to do it again. That is, as 
you set out to systematize continually what you learn, some orga-
nizing principles emerge that form the basis of an organization. As 
that organization emerges, you finally stand to benefit in a strong 
way from what the field of management has laid out for you. I 
wrote about these highly specialized concepts in the introduction 
to this book:

226 

PRELUDE

Keywords and highly specialized concepts such as need, product, 
distribution,  value  chain,  users,  lead  users,  competitive  forces, 
value creation, and value capture do not have meanings set in 
stone. At the beginning of an innovator’s inquiry, they are largely 
undefined and ambiguous; they acquire their precise meanings 
and their analytical strength only over time through the inquiry 
of the innovator, from the organization that emerges, and in the 
context of the problem that organization ultimately solves.

This should clarify my reference to an infinite loop. You set out to 
solve a problem that ultimately requires some kind of organiza-
tion. The organization ought to be solving the problem continu-
ously for as long as the problem exists—that is, forever or until a 
challenger  ousts  you.  That’s  what  the  innovation  literature  pre-
dicts.  That  might  happen,  for  instance,  when  the  problem  that 
gives you purpose has become obsolete, that is, you stopped solv-
ing for the problem—you stopped innovating.

 

PRELUDE 

227

A better question than whether to stop is what you want to 
grow.  That  begins  with  systematizing  what  you  have  learned, 
which you can choose to start doing at any time. You do not have 
to wait for a revelation to emerge from anything you do.

Here are four examples of things you might want to grow that 

could go on forever:

•  You could make a life’s work out of turning hunches into in-
creasingly clear opportunities. This might involve, for instance, 
building an “innovating corporation” that specializes in identi-
fying tangible opportunities and “spinning out” organizations, 
much as research labs “spin out” papers.
•  You could increase the scale of your innovating incrementally 
and make external investment a choice. People have been known 
to build large businesses this way; chapter 7 provides the logic 
that would allow you to do so.
•  You could make it a point to build one business and then build 
another on top of it. In chapter 9 I show you how to advocate for 

228 

PRELUDE

resources to do this, and in chapter 10 I show you how to think 
of growth this way.
•  You can also set an arbitrary time limit for resolving whether 
to jump a scale up or move on to a different hunch or different 
people or different parts.

The chapters in part III help you look at your innovation pro-
totype for the purpose of systematizing what you learn. Chapter 8 
helps you understand advocacy as something you’ve been practic-
ing all along. Chapter 9 explains how to view risks and certainties 
as  progress  indicators  for  what  you  have  learned  and  as  instru-
ments for communicating the robustness of your idea. Chapter 10 
explores the notion of growth in connection with scale. Chapter 11 
shows you how to enact this book as a process with teams engaged 
in innovating continuously. Chapter 12 explains how to document 
what you do so you can get started again at the next scale or from 
the very beginning—it makes no difference.

 

PRELUDE 

229

     8
8

practicing advocacy     

At some point, it may seem as though everything your problem calls for next 
requires resources you don’t have: parts beyond your means, skills you lack, 
money you don’t have, and/or knowledge and expertise you don’t possess. It 
may feel as if your problem is conspiring against you to erect a roadblock.

Put another way, it may seem that taking the scale of your innovating up 
a notch is the only path left on which to make progress. You don’t really 
know whether that’s true. But there’s only one way to find out: Approach 
people who have the resources you need and propose that they join you; and 
continue to make it a purpose to find out how you are wrong. In other words, 
keep doing what you should have been doing all along.

The juxtaposition of two ideas—you do not know how to progress and 
yet you have resolved to advocate for resources with which to make it even 
bigger—may feel like anxiety, and more so the first time around. You know it 
is anxiety because unanswerable questions begin to race through your head. 
Should I seek funding? What if there aren’t any investors where I live? What 
if this is my only shot with the senior executives? Do I just need to put in a 
bit more work into it?

The  way  out  is  to  assume  you  probably  have  all  the  connections  you 
need, the people you need do exist and are accessible, what you have ought to 
be enough, and—since these questions have emerged—now is probably a 
good time to go out and seek those resources. There is just one assumption 
that is wrong: you are not going out for resources to make your idea bigger.

You  never  get  only  resources;  people  come  along,  too.  Together,  you  
build a bigger idea, not just your bigger version of your earlier idea. You are 
building a deal.

You never just get resources; people come 

along, too. Together, you build a bigger idea, 

not just your bigger version of your earlier idea.

You now see a way to solve a problem that is impactful and interesting at 
a larger scale, and you have a good sense of what it will take because you can 
itemize what you are now missing; you also know that problems evolve as 
they are influenced by the people who work on them.

Let’s look more closely at how all this works. Whether you are advocat-
ing, verifying, or inquiring, you focus on different aspects of the problem 
you have, and you ask for different things. Advocacy probably requires the 
most comprehensive look at everything you do, so let’s begin there.

You may take advocacy as an opportunity to practice synthesizing your 
innovating as a whole, and reveal your innovation prototype as what it is 
bound to become to others interested in knowing how you propose to use 
their resources. It  is a great exercise, and you should make a habit of it: Re-
state your problem by making your innovation prototype be a “demo” of the 
problem solved. Restating the problem invariably reveals shortcomings and 

232 

CHAPTER 8

holes in your reasoning that you can generally remedy through inquiry or 
verification. That is, preparing for advocacy is valuable in itself.

You can begin by thinking that in all these activities—advocacy, inquiry, 
and verification—you likely know more than your counterparts about the 
idea that gives you purpose. They have resources you need, but they may not 
even know they do if they can’t understand you. Your job is to make the 
problem you’ve made tangible for yourself equally tangible for them (within 
time constraints) so you can focus the discussion on the things they have or 
know and you do not. That’s when all the work you’ve put into your innova-
tion prototype as you strived to make the problem tangible to yourself be-
comes  extremely  valuable.  The  more  “tangible”  the  conversation  at  this 
point, the greater the value.

Your  purpose  is  not  to  seek  approval  or  get  permission,  even  though 
that’s what you might get. Your purpose remains—as always—to find out 
how you are wrong. However, if you are seeking funding at this point, every-
thing may feel a bit different.

At  times,  entrepreneurial  recipes  place  so  much  emphasis  on  funding 
your idea that it is difficult to distinguish advocacy from propaganda when it 
comes time to communicate with others who might be sources of that fund-
ing. What you need to do instead is communicate with your counterparts 
confidently, truthfully, and in the spirit of learning how you might be wrong. 

People may take you for someone just asking for 

money if they can’t understand you. Your job: Make 

the problem as tangible for them as it is for you, so 

you can focus on things they have or know that you 

don’t.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

233

Your purpose is not to seek approval or get 

permission. Your purpose remains, as always,  

to find out how you’re wrong—even when  

seeking funding.

Then you build on that communication to establish the basis for trust and 
for getting to know one another. And then you progress—if appropriate—
toward making a deal.

The deal you are about to strike goes like this: You are inviting some 
people with resources into your innovating in exchange for some of those 
resources; they likely will want something too. Before any of that can come 
to pass, you need to get their attention, and you all need to get to know one 
another.

Advocacy as I am describing it here is that communication about your 
idea and a space of opportunity, that getting to know one another, and getting 
to a deal.

You’ve Been Advocating All Along, and You’ll Continue
Advocacy is tricky. Early on, you may feel the pressing burden to fund 
your innovating, turning the sole purpose of advocacy into coming up 
with  a  way  to  get  investors  of  any  kind  to  love  your  idea.  However, 
advocacy is something you’ll have to do several times, for several different 

234 

CHAPTER 8

purposes. You’ll have to advocate when you are looking for customers, 
when you form a partnership or a joint venture or collaboration, when 
you go through the next stage of growth, and even if (or when) you decide 
to sell your business.

In  fact,  you’ve  been  practicing  a  lot  of  what  goes  into  advocacy  all 
along. Each time you’ve shared with others the problem you are solving, 
or some aspect of the problem, you have been practicing skills that play a 
role in advocacy. You’ve been practicing with every inquiry about your 
problem, such as seeking some specific knowledge you need or capturing 
unanticipated  insights  from  people’s  comments.  You  have  also  been 
practicing when you engage others to verify aspects of the problem to get 
a sense for whether your efforts to solve the problem match reality.

You  can  view  advocacy  as  the  activity  you  have  to  systematize  and 
perfect as your endeavor evolves from a subsidized business (e.g., a startup) 
into  a  self-sustaining  one.  This  is  also  true  if  your  endeavor  is  social: 
Eventually,  your  advocacy  for  resources  will  have  to  evolve  into  an 
organizational unit that makes sure you can continue to operate at each 
appropriate scale.

You may be advocating to an investor, strategic partner, owner of an 
exhibit hall, large corporation, acquirer-to-be, or donor—to name a few. 
In all cases, what you propose is the same: Given what you have and what 
they have, there is a way to build something new that makes everyone 
better off.

Those to whom you advocate don’t yet know what makes what you 
have interesting. You don’t really know what they have, nor do you know 
what they need to know. Hardly anyone decides to hand over resources in 
one sitting.

So,  prepare  to  build  relationships—to  advocate—through  several 

conversations, as you’ve been doing all along.

In this chapter, I discuss how to view advocacy as an opportunity to syn-
thesize the problem that gives you purpose so you can communicate it. I see 
advocacy as a natural extension of the skill you’ve been acquiring all along as 
you’ve practiced interfacing with people.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

235

Advocacy and fundraising

You already have the basic skills you need to go out and advocate for your 
innovating to obtain the resources you need. Again, what might feel differ-
ent this time is if you’ve persuaded yourself you need funding to continue 
your endeavor. To many, the perception that funding is needed can trump 
everything they have learned and demonstrated, propelling them into fanta-
syland enabled by slide deck. Aspiring innovators can follow myriad recipes 
for how to pitch an idea, talk to potential users and customers, and engage in 
similar activities. When the time comes to advocate for their projects, how-
ever, those who follow those recipes end up forgetting that the objective is, 
first and foremost, not funding but progress. 

This happens for two reasons. First, most entrepreneurial recipes inad-
vertently have you adopt a rather idealized duality: You have the idea; they 
have the money (or geeks and suits, or the innovator and the user). These 
recipes supply you with useful ways to craft a story to please your audience 
and persuade them to part with the funds you covet. In other words, they 
help you beautify and market an idea, which is different than—though often 
confused with—bringing your idea to market. In the former, you sell “the 
idea”; in the latter, you sell something that was at some earlier point only an 
idea. But those recipes don’t prepare you for the reality that those people do 
not just give over their resources, but also generally trade them for some kind 
of  ownership.  It  could  be  equity  ownership  or  ownership  over  collabora-
tion—in either case, you both own the idea at the other end of the deal. Sec-
ond, those recipes take for granted that you’ve already done whatever you 
had to do to make your idea good and solid, and that you are confident about 
it. All that remains is execution, which by now you’re also supposed to have 
figured out. Here again, hindsight factors in: The distinction between when 
you stopped sensing and when you started executing is something you can 
really identify only in hindsight. I know of no one who has that clarity when 
engaged in advocacy for innovation. But because these recipes focus over-
whelmingly on presentation, it seems at times that they are telling you to put 

236 

CHAPTER 8

doing on hold until you’ve gotten the resources. Even worse, these recipes 
suggest that doing prior to advocating to investors, users, or whoever some-
how disqualifies you.

The Fine Art of Letting a Recipe Get You Lost

At this point, most entrepreneurial recipes that have asked you to bet it all 
on  a  product  ask  you  to  give  it  a  name,  make  a  statement  about  the 
problem  you  are  solving,  and  build  your  value  proposition.  I  don’t 
necessarily disagree with that general flow; the recipes might work. But 
describing a problem is difficult enough without doing so merely for the 
purpose of making your product appear unique.

So, what should be your focus? A problem or a product? If you focus 
on a problem, the product must be subject to change. Most people evade 
this  question  by  supplanting  the  problem  with  a  dramatic  or  even  a 
catastrophic fact (e.g., “783 million people do not have access to clean 
water”) and hoping that it passes for a problem.

Building a value proposition is also difficult. What you are proposing 
is obviously a proposition, but people to whom you advocate—whether it 
be to sell a product or to raise funding—expect you to have done your 
homework and to present something that is valuable to them, valuable 
being the operative keyword.

The same goes for the name of your product. At first people just need 
a handle, something to call you. A brand can be a handle, but a handle 
need not be a brand. For instance, you could just assign a random name—
say, Project 71. For a while, it simply will not matter.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

237

If you’ve never advocated, or your idea is just a bit audacious, it is difficult 

not to get yourself and your innovating lost in a “pitching” recipe.

The idealized duality view doesn’t help you much, because it sets you up 
to believe from the get-go that you need them more than they need you. 
After all, they have money and you don’t. Even if that’s true, it’s a poor nego-
tiating position and one you should avoid. Chances are they have at least 
some interest in putting their resources to work on innovations; otherwise 
you would not be meeting. You have demonstrated something to be possible 
and probable, and you have a plan to make it doable and sustainable. You 
need to believe you’ll pull through no matter what, which includes believing 
that you’ll be able to do it with or without them. If it isn’t them, as I already 
noted, you’ll find better associates down the road. 

Still,  when  you  advocate—even  for  funding—you  should  view  your 

counterparts as people, not wallets.

I suggest you take a skeptical view of these idealized recipes; that’s how 
you’ll get the most out of them. I see advocacy—along with the related ac-
tivities inquiry and verification—as part of a continuum. All these activities 
are engagements with other people. Each of them affords you an opportu-
nity to practice important skills. All of them help you develop the kind of 
“muscle memory” that comes from practice.

If you’ve never advocated, or your idea is just a bit 

audacious, it’s difficult not to get yourself and your 

innovating lost in a “pitching” recipe.

238 

CHAPTER 8

“Automating” Your Advocacy Through Practice

In this chapter, I emphasize more than in the preceding chapters how you 
go about several aspects of your innovating in a manner that helps you 
become  better  at  doing  it.  Earlier,  I  described  it  as  a  kind  of  muscle 
memory.

Doing things in a seemingly “automatic” way—that is, without con-
sciously giving it some thought—is something we adults describe with a 
lot of different words. I think this comes from a need to rationalize to 
ourselves  those  moments  when  we  operate  “off  script”  and  without  a 
formula. We call it “intuition,” “creativity,” “bright idea,” “connecting the 
dots,” “insight,” and so on. We say it can’t be explained, but that we know 
it when we see it. Most of the words we use to describe this phenomenon 
have positive connotations, implying that we generally like the outcomes, 
but they are also somewhat abstract and hindsight-heavy, which is why we 
shy away from using them when called upon to explain to someone else 
what to do or how to do something.

The basic idea behind making something you do “automatic,” though, 
is quite simple: The more you repeat a task, the more your brain seems 
able to “automate” aspects of it so that each time you undertake the task 
you need to expend fewer resources. That frees resources for learning the 
next level of skill. Also, the more you can find similarities with some other 
task you’ve done before, the less you’ll need to “compute” how to do the 
new task and the more you can rely on what you’ve already learned.

Research suggests the human brain indeed works this way. Does it have 
to do with our ability to acquire language? With internal grammar? With 
conditioning?  The  good  news  is  that  you  don’t  need  a  scientific 
explanation for how or why to use this to your advantage.

Finding similarities in tasks helps you practice so you can benefit most 
from this way your brain works, without relying on formulas. This is how 
you equip your brain with whatever it needs to produce intuitions later. 
Over time, in school, we generally forget to do this, because we’re taught 
so many specific formulas for this and for that. But your innovating will 
be well served by finding similarities among different things rather than 
emphasizing differences.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

239

Advocacy as an extension to inquiry and verification

At a high level, advocacy, inquiry, and verification all support the same ob-
jective:  A  very  specific  “something”  is  somehow  preventing  your  path  to 
scale-up, and you need to overcome it in order to continue. You do not have 
the means to do so, but “someone” else does. You discover what the “some-
thing” is that you need as you make your problem tangible; you need to en-
gage and persuade the “someone” who has it to give that “something” to you 
and see what he or she may want in return. The “something” might be infor-
mation, insight, contact, a part, knowledge, or money. The “someone” can be 
any of the people you encounter in your innovating.

That engagement involves the following:
•  You talk  about  the  problem  you’ve  made  tangible,  and  why  it  mat-
ters—which is the answer to the “what are you up to?” question from 
chapter 4.
•  You state what is needed to progress. Depending on how you frame the 
story, this may come from how you verify the problem is solved or from 
what any solution needs to accomplish.
•  You  show  a  tangible  demonstration  of  your  problem—that  is,  your 
functioning innovation prototype that illustrates the larger reality you 
aspire to conquer.
•  You ask for the resources you need to take your next steps—that is, the 
next set of parts and insights that emerge from your interrogation of your 
prototype.
•  You demonstrate as tangibly and sensibly as you can how what you’ve 
asked for will translate into the progress you said was needed—that is, 
you explain your next steps, the logical chain of possibility discussed at 
the end of chapter 7 (on which I expand in chapters 9 and 10).
•  All along, you listen in order to find out how you are wrong. By now 
this should be a habit. You don’t accept comments at face value; rather, 

240 

CHAPTER 8

you argue with facts and drive the conversation to what in the opinion of 
those you converse with would make it all right.
Let me show you how this may work and how it connects to inquiry and 
verification by playing out the case in which you are advocating for funding 
and trying to figure out what might go wrong—as in the trip examples in 
chapter 7.

Getting ready for advocacy

You’ve decided to add a task in your innovating: to seek someone else’s re-
sources. You will have to explain to others what you have, where you are 
headed,  and  how  their  resources  would  come  into  play.  You  either  show 
them what they might accomplish by joining forces with you or you leave 
them confident that you will be a good steward of their resources—that is, 
you intend to use them as you use yours and learn a disproportionate amount 
from doing so. You will also need to discover what they might want from you.
That’s a lot for a single conversation, so plan for it to unfold over several 
meetings. Your objective is to learn as much as you can each time. But first 
you have to get their attention. As a matter of fact, you’ll have to continue to 
earn their attention all along until they care enough about what you’ll do 
together that they see your innovation prototype—as you do—for the larger 
reality it illustrates. That larger reality likely will be slightly different from 
what you see now. Put another way, what you have now is a near miss of what 
you’ll  have  after  you  all  agree  to  work  together.  Right  now,  though,  they 
don’t care.

Let me emphasize that. They do not know you, they do not care about 
your innovation prototype, and they do not care how you got there—until 
you earn their attention. You need a story.

You do know the kind of story they want to hear: You are proposing 
something that will create significantly more value for both of you than what 
a bank might yield for an equivalent investment—and then some to cope 

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

241

with risk. This is obviously true for the case of professional investors, but it is 
also true for partners, or even suppliers and customers: when it comes to in-
novation, you buy into things—and also buy things—that you believe will 
make you far better off in some way. Even at home, unless you are paying the 
utility bill, you hope that the things you buy will give you back more than 
they cost you. That’s a quick way to define value.

You can sum it all up in the first advocacy prototype. The curve shown in 
figure 8.1 illustrates the dynamic of your story, the magnitude of your impact 
over time. Your particular story determines what goes into the axes, the units, 
and the scale. Adding them is your job.

For instance, you can gauge the magnitude of impact by sales, number of 
views, dollars, number of citations, or number of visitors. You might gauge 
progress toward scale by time, milestones, or some other measure.

Since it is up to you to define all the axes and scales, you still get to deter-
mine how far the right end of curve will go. Note, however, that the less you 

Your growth curve, for which you define the axes.  

242 

CHAPTER 8

aim to produce at the left tail end, the less you implicitly value the effort you 
are putting in. Do not expect anyone to value that effort any more than you do.
Just don’t forget that the point of doing this is to begin appraising the 
magnitude of the job you are giving to yourself and your team for the next 
several months. It is not to paint a rosy picture for prospective investors. You 
are planning backward from the problem solved. The team is committing to 
bring the solution you envision to the scale at which it really is a solution. You 
are all now innovation scale-up engineers.

Whether  you  choose  to  show  the  curve  explicitly  is  a  matter  of  style. 
However, it helps keep you honest. Whatever your solution, and whatever 
your problem, your story arc needs to make sense. You have something and 
you are asking for something else; it will take some expending and some time 
before what you do yields any return; the return over time will be significant; 
and your story needs no strange or hidden plot twists or ridiculous leaps of 
faith to get to your conclusion, which is a demonstrable impact.

This is also a story about learning and organizing. It takes more than a 
handful of people to build and grow something. If you are to learn a dispro-
portionate amount and grow, you need to systematize everything you learn so 
it benefits the people who will join you. Your learning will translate into some 
specifications  and  organizing  principles,  and  what  you  are  growing  is  an 
organization.

Whatever your solution, and whatever your problem, 

your story arc needs to make sense. You need no 

strange or hidden plot twists or ridiculous leaps  

of faith to get to your conclusion, which is a 

demonstrable impact.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

243

A Business (Organization) Model

The  organization  you  are  building  is  a  machine.  It  creates  order  from 
chaos. You need to put work into your organization or else it violates the 
second law of thermodynamics. For our purposes, it suffices to know that 
the law’s main point is that nothing gets organized by itself.

No matter how intricate that machine, you ought to be able to explain 
with a simple model how it will organize things. The model must explain 
the dynamic flows of people, capital, and resources from the current state 
to a problem being solved.

Since you are building the machine while running it, your model will 
also have to consider how the machine evolves. This can get hairy for a 
model  with  only  arrows;  you  may  need  to  run  multiple  scenarios  in  a 
spreadsheet for things to begin to make sense.

That’s the model of your organization. If you built a business, it is a 
business model. And at the very least it ought to explain how you’ll pay 
for things, how things will get where they need to go, how beneficiaries 
will find you, and who will pay you and how.

There are various recipes you might follow to analyze the structure of 
a business by its components, organizational finances, and/or tabulated 
comparables  (with  names  such  as  “razor,”  “crowd,”  “subscription,” 
“advertising,” and “reimbursement”). But you need to have conceived of 
the dynamics of your organization before they’re of any use. A model is 
fundamentally an explanation of how those dynamics work.

In my teaching, I have found it useful to build toward an understanding 
of organizational models by addressing first a business model’s purpose: 
You  are  proposing  to  arrive  at  a  state  in  which  parts  and  people  are 
increasingly organized and a problem is solved for a community of people 
outside  your  organization.  This  increase  in  order  is  also  a  decrease  in 
entropy.

James Clerk Maxwell and other physicists explained that even demons 

cannot escape entropy.

244 

CHAPTER 8

This logic applies if you’re building a business (which has been the focus 
of this chapter so far), if you’re an artist, if you’re a researcher, or if you envi-
sion a nonprofit. An artist, for instance, might build an organization through 
exhibits and might measure growth by number of visitors. That artist can 
only hope it will not take as much effort per person to get the first ten visi-
tors as it will take to tend to millions.

To summarize getting ready for advocacy, this is what you’re trying to 

accomplish:

•  You are growing an organization that will solve a problem sustainably.
•  You have an innovation prototype that demonstrates the problem and, 
by demonstrating, outlines the organization.
•  You are asking people to join you in your innovating and to bring their 
resources (money, insight, direction, contacts, experience, … ).
•  You have a proposal for how to use those resources and what they will 
achieve for all of you, and you see a path to a disproportionate amount of 
learning (a.k.a. value) using those resources.

Advocacy meetings: a ballet in three movements

After a number of meetings—in my experience, it takes at least three and 
probably more—you’ll either have a deal or not. From meeting to meeting, 
the “resolution” at which you discuss your innovating will become sharper 
and sharper. If you make a deal, it likely will modify the axes, units, and scale 
of what you initially proposed.

The meetings are like a ballet, and ballets require choreography. This 
may seem like an odd way to describe meetings—it certainly is nothing like 
the  entrepreneurship  recipe  books—but  taking  this  approach,  I  believe, 
shows how accessible the process is and avoids the tedium that is inevitable 
when describing meetings in more traditional ways. 

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

245

Allow me then to “choreograph” what meetings may look like by analogy 
to a three-movement ballet. Admittedly, this is a fantastical ballet in a very 
extreme setting. You are unlikely to set out to talk to someone who is a com-
plete  stranger,  as  in  this  ballet.  It’s  much  more  likely  that  you’ll  “waylay” 
someone who knows someone you know and you’ll drop the other person’s 
name. And you probably will do it all in a different setting. But please in-
dulge me this story—inspired by the film The Hudsucker Proxy—and give it 
a chance to brew in your mind.

In  the  ballet,  you  are  the  prima  ballerina,  equivalent  to  the  character 

played by Tim Robbins in the movie.

Movement 1—getting someone’s attention
The curtain rises on the first movement of our ballet, in which you find the 
person with whom you want to have a meeting. Let’s say he’s an executive at 
a  company  with  headquarters  in  an  extraordinarily  tall  building.  You  en-
counter him as he gets on the elevator and pitch your plan for world domina-
tion during a very slow ride to the top floor. He exits the elevator and bids 
you farewell, shaking your hand. You notice, however, that his eyes and body 
are already aiming elsewhere. Still, you hold firmly to his hand and continue 
to talk about your idea at an increasingly faster rate until a security guard 
notices and intervenes to undo your grip. As the two men rush away, you 
shout out your request for another meeting, go back down on the elevator, 
and continue to ride it up and down as you await the moment to pounce on 
your next prey. The curtain closes on movement 1.

In some other ballet, you may have succeeded in getting that meeting. In this 
one, you did not.

What might have gone wrong? It could be that you forgot to ask for ad-
vice, or perhaps you failed to mention that there is a purpose to your reaching 

246 

CHAPTER 8

out—say, getting funding—because you were so focused on getting out your 
idea.  Maybe  you  came  across  as  too  nervous,  which  made  you  sound 
doubtful  about  your  own  idea.  It  could  be  that  you  talked  too  much 
about what you had already done and not enough about the impact or 
about how you envision a future to which your counterpart might con-
tribute. Did you fail to make the problem sound interesting? Might the 
problem need something else to interest others?

Alternatively, you might have lucked out: He told you why he sees 
your problem as uninteresting. That will help you be better prepared to 
describe your idea. Describing an idea that is new and only half-formed 
is quite difficult. You can make it easier in two ways. One begins with 
accepting that, even though your prototype has helped you imagine some 
larger reality, it is only a demonstration of what’s possible. The other is 
by practicing your explanation until you feel it is second nature to you 
and  you  can  present  it  clearly  and  confidently.  A  lot  depends  on  how 
confident you sound—much more so than on how robust your idea is.

The  last  point  is  important.  Prototyping  something  gets  you  deep 
into a problem, and it can be tough to come back up to the surface to 
make an easy pitch. That’s part of why the recipe books prescribe that 
you not do. But with some practice, you can easily accommodate in your 
head both the deep view afforded by your innovation prototype and the 
confident, synthesized description of a larger reality in which the prob-
lem that gives you purpose has been solved (even if that latter description 
is almost surely a near miss).

If you were even luckier and the executive asked or said something 
about your idea, he cued you to ask for a more formal meeting. Even if he 
said he wasn’t interested in funding you, you might succeed in persuad-
ing  him  to  meet  with  you  to  give  you  some  advice  or  to  point  you  to 
someone  else—and  thus  transform  what  started  as  advocacy  into  an  
opportunity for inquiry.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

247

Practicalities for Getting People’s Attention

Every one of the encounters described in chapter 4 is an opportunity to 
practice. You should make a point to create different versions of an answer 
for  the  “What  are  you  up  to?”  question  and  try  them  out.  Now  the 
prototype  is  communication,  and  words  are  parts.  You  know  you  are 
ready  to  explain  what  you  are  after  when  doing  so  becomes  second 
nature—so much so that you don’t even think twice about it—and when, 
in every single case, people ask you follow-up questions about what you 
do, not about what you meant.

If you are indeed selling an idea, then there is a value to the “sale.” It just 
so  happens  that  what  you  are  selling  now—a  piece  of  your  imagined 
company—may  itself  do  something  that  also  has  a  value  proposition. 
However, for the sake of getting people’s attention now, it is the first “sale” 
that matters, not the value proposition of what your imagined company 
sells. The value proposition of what your company sells is given by what 
people will be able to accomplish when the problem is solved. The value 
proposition of your idea is the clarity with which you can articulate what 
needs to be true about a solution—your verification recipe.

My  research  shows  that  most  people,  when  recounting  to  others  a 
presentation they just heard, find it sufficient to use only three ideas. If it’s 
your presentation they’re recounting, you want them to spread the word 
about how valuable a solution you proposed—even if you didn’t describe 
in detail how you intend to solve the problem.

You get people’s attention with a teaser. The feature presentation is in 
movement 2 of the imaginary ballet. You outline the value proposition for 
joining you in the adventure that is to follow, which hinges on the problem 
you solve, what you have demonstrated, what you are asking for, and the 
magnitude of the impact you foresee.

248 

CHAPTER 8

Making Your Point

Make your point first. If you are asking for something, ask. Be sure that 
your materials are always structured so that it takes no more than a few 
minutes to give a high-level description of your purpose and what you are 
after. Prepare, rehearse, and practice so that your description will come 
out natural and clear. Then be ready to expand on what you described as 
the conversation unfolds. Allow yourself to be interrupted; in fact, hope 
to be interrupted. Give conversation a chance.

Let me tell you how I came to learn the importance of all this. When I 
was a PhD candidate, I attended a training seminar titled “Introduction 
to teaching for non-American teaching assistants.” The instructor drew 
two triangles on the board, one pointing up and the other down, and said 
that  time  started  at  the  top  of  each  of  them.  Students,  she  explained, 
expect you to make a point early on, and then to elaborate. That gives 
students the opportunity to figure out what you’re talking about and gives 
them license to interrupt with questions if something isn’t clear.

Referring  to  the  other  triangle,  the  instructor  explained  that  many 
non-Americans try to build arguments until the point becomes apparent. 
Do that, she explained, and the students have to wait until you’re finished 
before they know what you are talking about. Sure, they try piecing things 
together while you’re speaking, but that only shifts their attention away 
from whatever you say next, and once you’re finished they have to try 
reconstructing all the questions that emerged. Teaching this way leaves 
any classroom interaction dependent on students’ ability on that day to 
hold onto your every word. In view of how little students sleep, you may 
never get your point across. 

When teaching, she concluded, use the other triangle. Make an effort 

to make your point first.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

249

Movement 2—the larger reality you will create together
In the second movement of our ballet, you’ve succeeded in getting a second 
meeting. The executive you waylaid in the elevator meets you at reception 
and takes you to a conference room, where he introduces the company’s chief 
innovation officer. She tells you she’s intrigued by the plan for world domi-
nation, which she recounts in three strokes.

You make your presentation, in which you demonstrate your prototype 
and show a bunch of charts—some intended as inspirational and some with 
carefully constructed projections of what’s going to happen. Most of what 
you present are educated guesses. There are a lot of questions. The curtain 
closes on movement 2.

Every question asked matters. Every question points to something peo-
ple expect you to know, comparables people use, and essentially everything 
you can derive from your inquiry. Unlike in earlier inquiries, though, here 
you’ve shared your entire prototype, and so feedback is likely more targeted 
than what you got from casual conversations or what you got from asking an 
“expert” about a specific aspect of your problem.

Comparables?

At some point in movement 2 of the imaginary ballet, comparables may 
come up. Their purpose is to give tangibility to your larger reality. They 
illustrate how others (such as other companies) in your space do things 
and, by analogy, how you might have to do things.

As you prepare for advocacy, there’s value you can extract from any 
kind  of  comparable.  Comparables  can  be  parts.  Everything  in  your 
innovation prototype that is not a material part may be explainable as “we 

250 

CHAPTER 8

will do such and such, not unlike Company X.” To be clear, Company X 
may not be an actual competitor and may not even be in your space. Used 
as a part in this way, a comparable helps you render an aspect of your 
problem tangible.

Here’s how you can use comparables as parts:

•  Pick any company.
•  Ask yourself what you think it does that resembles what you 
want to accomplish.
•  Figure out how the company does it.
•  Try to show you are wrong, that is, that you can’t replicate what 
it does.

You  can  also  identify  these  comparables  as  potential  acquirers, 
collaborators, and partners in this way. After all, you claim you want to do 
something like they do. Maybe it is more effective for you to do it with 
them.

But  even  if  a  comparable  ends  up  fulfilling  no  further  role  in  your 
innovating,  it  will  still  make  your  idea  more  tangible  and  help  you 
systematize. Whether you include the comparables in your story explicitly 
or simply talk about what you will do on the basis of what you learned 
about what they do is a function of how you choose to tell your story.

Maybe the meeting was good; maybe not. Let’s assume it was a catastro-
phe. What might have gone wrong? Perhaps your feature presentation in 
movement 2 felt unlike the teaser from movement 1; maybe you had to resort 
to unexpected plot twists to make the logic work—a leprechaun. Perhaps 
your “comparables” made no sense to your audience. Perhaps, as often hap-
pens, what you demonstrated was not even needed in your story.

Perhaps no one agreed that what you proposed solves the problem you 
described. This also happens frequently—after all, you can reduce the most 
grandiose problem to a slide deck and propose next steps. You’ll know you’ve 
fallen into this trap if your audience fails to see how those next steps lead to 
the problem being solved.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

251

Chances are your narrative follows from what you have prototyped go-
ing forward rather than backward from what you envision building. Your 
innovation prototype is but a scaled-down version of a problem and its solu-
tion, and your job is to scale it up. Your story needs to project backward from 
the future you plan to build so your innovation prototype is a proof of con-
cept of what’s possible—no matter how you arrived at the prototype. It needs 
to do that because you should not expect your audience to do your home-
work for you. Ask yourself the obvious question first: If neither you nor your 
prototype/tech/bizmodel/design are in the picture, might the problem be 
solved more simply? Perhaps with a slingshot?

Earlier in this chapter, I wrote the more “tangible” the conversation, the 
greater the value. It applies here: The more tangible the reality in which you 
anchor your story, the higher the perceived value of what you would contrib-
ute to those who hear your story, and the clearer the value of what they might 
contribute going forward.

Mind the trap: Grandiose problems fit in a slide-

deck, next to steps you’ll never walk. Use your 

innovation prototype. It demonstrates a tangible 

destination.

Your innovation prototype can be that tangible anchor. It demonstrates 
a final destination that does not yet exist, and helps you illustrate a foresee-
able impact. You can show the functions of your eventual organization that 
you deemed critical to demonstrate at this scale, and you can point to tangi-
ble next steps and milestones, the associated risks and certainties, and the 
resources they require. I discuss these in greater detail in chapters 9 and 10.

252 

CHAPTER 8

How Your Prototype Helps You Tell Your Story

You  now  have  an  innovation  prototype  that  makes  an  entire  space  of 
opportunity tangible. Use it to help tell your story:

•  Convince your audience the problem is real. Your prototype 
demonstrates this by means of what needs to be accomplished,  
what makes a solution a solution, or through an outline of a 
solution. The information you gathered hints at the impact of the 
problem being solved and the specific need to attain a certain 
scale.
•  Show your audience the problem can be solved. Your prototype 
is a representation of the organization and the people required to 
solve the problem at scale. You can use it to outline precisely what 
is needed to address the problem at scale.
•  Demonstrate to your audience how to reach an endpoint.

Because your innovation prototype also addresses the organizational 
parts needed to address the problem, you may use it to make apparent the 
vehicle with which you solve the problem at its true scale. You can show 
how you imagine the endpoint and then work backward to show what 
must be accomplished.

The specific objective of your advocacy is to enable you to continue scal-
ing up. It is not to get permission. Even with a tangible anchor, there is no 
guarantee others will give you what you need. They may not even have it. 
Perhaps they do, and even consider your logic sound, but still choose not to 
give it to you.

There are two possible outcomes at the end of the ballet’s second move-
ment: You will or you will not get the specific “something” you were after. If 
you don’t get it, the executives probably said something that reveals why. 
That valuable insight may not apply immediately, but it will apply eventually. 
Either way, you walk away from that conversation empty-handed only if you 
believe you have everything figured out and that the others are the ones who 
are wrong.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

253

Movement 3—the specific details for a deal
Having explained your plan for world domination and further aroused the 
interest of the chief innovation officer, you have succeeded in getting an-
other meeting with her and the other executive. (In someone else’s ballet, 
there might also be lawyers, accountants, and others at the table.) Now it’s all 
about specifics. They ask a lot more questions, but the nature of the ques-
tions has changed. The questions are no longer about your prototype or the 
larger reality you envision at the end; now the questions are about how to get 
there. You recognize this as “due diligence.”

After a while, the chief information officer pulls a term sheet out of a 
folder and passes it to you across the table. You look it over. You ask some 
questions of your own, even some “stupid” ones. Their answers reveal how 
they’re thinking.

Entr’acte 
Movement 3 has an entr’acte. The curtain comes down on the first part of 
the movement, and while the music continues you and the other dancers are 
offstage. You use the time first to discuss the term sheet with a trusted coun-
selor. Then you go talk with the folks in the other ballet you’ve been dancing 
in when not dancing in this one. (Yes, you should make a point of dancing in 
multiple ballets.) You compare the term sheet you just got with the term 
sheet the dancers in the other ballet had given you yesterday. By the time the 
entr’acte is over, you’ve prepared your answer.

The grand finale? (and beyond)
The curtain rises, and you are again across the table from the chief innova-
tion officer and the executive. You present your decision about their “offer.” 
A discussion ensues. The curtain closes on the ballet.

254 

CHAPTER 8

What happens after the curtain closes? There are only two possible out-
comes: deal or no deal. It depends on your decision. You may say “No, thank 
you”  to  the  executives’  offer.  You  may  accept  the  term  sheet  as  is  or  as  it 
emerges from the further discussion that ensues.

Let’s assume that you decline the offer. What went wrong? Maybe you’re 
not interested in the idea the CIO and the executive proposed you build to-
gether, or you don’t value the next steps in the same way. Perhaps the terms of 
the offer were bad for you. Perhaps the term sheet is a reality check; you real-
ize  through  dancing  that  you  do  not  like  your  own  idea  as  much  as  you 
thought you did. (I have seen that happen.) Perhaps it’s in the other ballet 
that you dance a pas de deux.

Whatever your decision, you have learned.

Charting a space of opportunity

It may not seem immediately apparent, but what I have asked you to do is 
piece together a vision of what you will accomplish at that larger scale in 
much the same way I asked you to make your problem tangible. This time, 
though,  you  are  making  the  problem  tangible  for  others  who  are  not  yet 
committing fully to your innovation prototype. That is why you need to 
build a story—and that story starts from the end. In other words, it starts 
from the imaginary organization you envision will solve the problem you 
now have reproduced at a small scale, and proceeds backward from there to 
find in the innovation prototype a demonstration of what’s possible: a proof 
of concept.

This is not unlike what Pólya talks about for problem solving: Take the 
time to explain to yourself the roadmap to a solution at scale—make a plan. 
Your plan to implement the solution to the problem at the right scale and 
your plan to conceive the solution ought to be one and the same.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

255

Throughout this chapter, I have illustrated advocacy using the example 
of seeking investment because it is reasonably straightforward compared to 
all the other contexts. It is the advocacy equivalent of teaching elementary 
mechanics with the inclined plane. As you progress, you’ll have to advocate 
to buyers, partners, strategic partners, suppliers, and so on. Advocating to 
investors is the rarest of the circumstances in which you’ll have to advocate—
that is, it will happen only a few times, at least by comparison with how often 
you’ll advocate to customers. Still, the logic is about the same in every  
advocacy circumstance.

Your plan to implement the solution to the problem 

at the right scale and your plan to conceive the 

solution ought to be one and the same.

No matter how pretty your innovation prototype, or even if you have a 
product, be sure not to fool yourself into believing that succeeding at advo-
cacy is the end. It might be a beginning; irrespective of whether it is, your 
objective is to chart a space of opportunity.

256 

CHAPTER 8

Takeaways

•  You can stress over raising funds or you can make advocacy come naturally 
through practice. When you advocate for resources for your innovating, you 
are fundamentally inviting others to buy into a larger reality you’ll build to-
gether, and to take what you have built thus far as a demonstration that the 
larger reality is doable—a proof of concept.
•  Many entrepreneurial recipes for advocacy present a rather static picture of 
a process that begins and ends with the pitch for investment. In reality, the 
“pitch” evolves constantly; the techniques described in this book are useful 
for gathering data with which to “accessorize” your pitch.
•  Think of advocacy as an extension of inquiry and verification. Advocacy 
may first become obvious in the context of an investment deal but may con-
tinue beyond that and may also happen when you develop a partnership, as 
you acquire customers (whether consumers or organizations), and in general 
every  time  you  find  it  necessary  to  show  someone  the  value  of  joining 
forces.
•  The reasons for advocating evolve. As you systematize your innovating, 
what you have learned through advocacy may inform how you build a busi-
ness development function, a marketing department, or something else. The 
general progression of advocacy, though, remains the same: Get someone’s 
attention, get to know one another and build trust as you unfold a proposal, 
and discuss specifics so the collaboration can begin.
•  Advocacy helps you connect your innovating to concepts such as business 
model, value proposition, comparables, and competitors, and others.
•  There is a way for you to turn advocacy into a habit: You just need to prac-
tice. Make every occasion an opportunity to practice.

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

257

258 

CHAPTER 8

 

PRACTICING ADVOCACY 

259

     9
9

risk, doing, learning, 

and uncertainty     

If there are any risks at all as you are innovating, they’re surely not there at the 
outset.

Just assembling some parts and talking to some people carries with it, at 
most, an opportunity cost of not having talked to some other people or as-
sembled some other parts. It follows that if risks arise along the way, it’s be-
cause of something else you do or are about to do. Should you do things dif-
ferently, risks—if they do arise—may be different.

Even things that may seem out of your control are risks only because of 

choices you made that exposed you to those externalities.

You can do something different or make other choices and shape those 

risks.

Because your actions and choices are the reasons risks arise, you have far 
more control than you probably think you have. You chose those risks; you 
are actually the master of risks.

This is not the way the concept of risk is typically introduced.
Risk is usually defined as the potential for exposure to danger, harm, or 
loss. But that lacks the resolution you need to distinguish between the ac-
tions of your innovating and their outcomes.

Let’s resolve the resolution problem.
As I write in chapter 1, at the beginning, all you have is uncertainty—and 
uncertainty is what fuels your innovating. Risks emerge from your failure to 
reduce uncertainty, which is failure to learn, thus creating the potential for 
danger, harm, or loss.

You are the  

master  

of risks.

The concept of risk appears often in 
the  context  of  innovation  and  entrepre-
neurship: “entrepreneurs are risk takers”; 
“entrepreneurship  is  all  about  reducing 
risk”;  “tolerance  for  failure”;  “successful 
entrepreneurs thrive because they have an 
unusually low tolerance for failure.” I take 
this  diversity  of  opinions  as  suggesting 
that  risk  may  mean  different  things  de-
pending on whether you intend to use the 
notion  to  guide  your  innovating—the 
doer’s  perspective—or  whether  you  are  
assessing something someone else will do.

Risk—the doer’s perspective

From a doer’s perspective, there is something paradoxical about the idea of 
risk: Had you chosen to do nothing, there would be no risk at all. Does this 
mean that risks appear precisely because you set out to increase certainty 
about a problem systematically?

262 

CHAPTER 9

It would seem that the very notion of risk emerges only from the need to 
systematize your learning so your innovating can scale up. If that’s the case, 
there has to be a way to think about risk that is more utilitarian.

I have no hard evidence to support the existence of this paradox other 
than a few observations from my experience teaching, doing, and advis-
ing. When I ask students and aspiring innovators to itemize risks, they 
don’t produce a list of things that may go wrong; instead they produce a 
list of things they don’t yet know. When asked to produce a list of uncer-
tainties, or a list of the certainties they require to progress, they do not 
produce a list of actions to address what they don’t know, but a list of the 
categories of information they are missing. Yet when the same people are 
presented with a technology and asked what they might use it for, their 
first instinct is to generate a prolific list of all the reasons it will never 
work for anything they can think of—and the list tends to be extensive 
in  reasons  as  well  as  in  scope  of  applications.  Each  of  their  answers  is 
wrong—they answer a question other than the one I posed. But when 
their answers are examined together it turns out that they’ve produced 
all the correct answers they need to begin to plan their learning—as in-
novating—and make decisions about risks and uncertainties. All it takes 
is to show them how to sort the content of their answers so the initial 
questions are actually answered.

When you are innovating, drawing a distinction between certainty 
and risk that helps guide your doing can be tricky. Mathematicians, scien-
tists,  and  engineers  might  appreciate  the  subtleties  by  analogy  with 
“transforms.” Risk and certainty may be related to one another by some 
kind of transformation not unlike how we use the Fourier transform to 
move back and forth between time and frequency domains. You operate 
in whichever domain makes the calculations easiest, and you communi-
cate  in  whichever  domain  makes  connection  with  the  real-world  phe-
nomenon you are discussing easiest. Time and frequency, like risk and 
certainty, are just the domains in which you work.

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

263

Uncertainty and Learning

We  can  define  uncertainty  by  building  on  the  analogy  with  a  Fourier 
transform,  in  which  uncertainty  is  just  a  by-product  of  the  fact  that 
frequency and time (or, if you are a physicist, position and momentum) 
are not independent of one another. There is a limit to the precision with 
which you can know both. Put another way, you cannot know both at the 
same time with infinite precision. That defines uncertainty.

Risk and certainty are distinct variables, yet one can only hope that 
they will somehow be related. For instance, you may be able to mitigate 
risks  by  acquiring  a  set  of  certainties.  If  the  analogy  with  the  Fourier 
transform holds, you might expect there to be some uncertainty principle 
at play: the more you seek precision on the risks to which you are exposed, 
the wider a net you must cast to acquire the certainties you need, and thus 
the broader the knowledge you need and so the more you need to learn.

I have no proof for this, but the analogy seems intuitively correct. The 
right  kind  of  learning  contributes  to  reduce  the  uncertainty  you  must 
tolerate because it increases the precision with which you get to define 
risks and certainties.

For readers not familiar with the Fourier transform, let me introduce the 
distinction with a thought experiment. Assume that you have built one of 
something—your “innovation”—and that you decide to put it out there to 
see what happens.

If you have not made any promises or taken any money from investors or 
customers, the risk is low: at worst, embarrassment. The “dreadfulness” of 
the consequences grows with the scale at which you have made promises and 
taken resources. But risk in and of itself tells you only what will happen when 
you fail to do whatever is needed. Presaging that dreadfulness can supply 
your inquiry with the kind of existential anguish I write about in chapter 
7—so you make it your objective to learn ahead of time. Then you can choose 
to focus on certainties or risks.

264 

CHAPTER 9

Risk in and of itself tells you only what will happen 

when you fail to do whatever is needed.

You could easily post your “one of something” to a crowdfunding plat-
form and see whether there is any interest. Sooner or later, someone may 
want to use it or buy it; worse yet, there may be multiple people who want it, 
but you only have one. Your biggest risk is failing to deliver, which is actually 
the biggest risk every crowdfunded project faces (and which has been the 
source of a lot of distress).1

One path forward is to mitigate the risk of failing to deliver by looking at 
what you don’t yet know. You have produced only one; you now need to 
learn how to produce many. You can look back on the one you did produce 
and use it as a template to figure out how to produce more like it with less 
effort—as the founders of Greenpeace seem to have done. You can specify a 
set of tasks that need doing. For each task, you can assess the range of accept-
able outcomes (tolerance) and the range of outcomes you know you can de-
liver on (precision), and close the gap by acquiring new skills and capabili-
ties. Together, all tasks inform the range of variation your innovating may 
need to tolerate. On this path, you chose to learn about a risk, and in so do-
ing you determined the certainties you needed to acquire.

Alternatively, you could decide that you really want to learn something 
else and make the risk of not delivering disappear altogether. Instead of learn-
ing how to produce many, you could decide to use the one you’ve produced 
to do something else. You may not even care that much about that one be-
yond how it helps you do something else. You might decide to exhibit it, 
auction it off, or let someone else produce and market it, but building more 
of it is not your focus or interest. That’s what Charles and Ray Eames seem 

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

265

to have done with their Kazam! machine, which they created to help them 
implement a design in wood they couldn’t otherwise make happen. On this 
path, you choose what you want to learn and, in so doing, you determine the 
nature of the risks to which you expose yourself.

The Kazam! Machine*

The Kazam! machine emerged out of Charles and Ray Eames’s intuition 
that it ought to be possible to mold plywood into any shape easily. They 
built the machine out of wood and a bicycle pump.

The Kazam! machine could have become the basis for a business that  
mass produced bent plywood. It could have been intellectual property 
related to manufacturing. The Eameses could easily have opted to work 
on perfecting the manufacturing technique and improving their machine. 
Instead, the machine enabled them to win and fulfill a number of mass 
manufacturing and design contracts, including from the US Navy. Later, 
it became the central instrument they used to experiment with shape, and 
it enabled them to develop their iconic furniture.

All in all, for the Eameses the Kazam! machine’s impact was more that 
it enabled them to experiment and create than anything they got out of 
perfecting  and  commercializing  the  machine  itself.  They  preferred  to 
learn with it and ended up using it to produce new designs for splints and 
chairs and elements for exhibits, and indirectly to develop long-lasting 
relationships  with  manufacturers  such  as  the  noted  furniture  designer 
Herman Miller.

 *  For more on the Kazam! machine, see http://design.designmuseum.org/design/charles-ray 
-eames and http://www.loc.gov/loc/lcib/9905/eames.html.

You could apply the same logic to technologies, music, industrial innova-
tions, and social causes, to name a few domains, and arrive at the same con-
clusion: From a doer’s perspective, risk is not an absolute concept but a rela-
tive one. There is a trade-off between what you are interested in learning and 
the risks you are interested in exposing yourself to. It is your job to figure out 
what that trade-off implies for your innovating.

266 

CHAPTER 9

This illustrates my point that you, as a doer, are better served by a defini-
tion of risk that helps you see risk and certainty relative to your innovating as 
ancillary  variables  you  use  to  guide  the  choices  you  make—all  the  while 
learning as you scale up your innovating.

Risk can be relative. As with uncertainty, it’s just a 

variable doers use. Both change as you learn how 

to scale up your innovating and make choices.

Utilitarian definitions of risk, certainty, uncertainty, and 
learning

As with risk, there also tends to be confusion about the terms “certainty” and 
“uncertainty.” Most people badly want to equate certainty with predictabil-
ity, but doing so makes things harder for them. These terms don’t actually 
work the way  most people wish  they  did—something that becomes clear 
when we consider their antonyms. The opposite of “certainty” is not “uncer-
tainty”  but  “doubt,”  and  the  opposite  of  “uncertainty’  is  “predictability.” 
That makes “certainty” and “predictability” not synonymous. The fact that 
the two terms are at most partially related implies that you can achieve cer-
tainty  without  having  to  predict  everything.  This  should  actually  make 
things easier.

Risk, certainty, uncertainty, and learning serve very different purposes in 
your innovating. At a high level, risk creates the existential anguish you need 
to interrogate your innovation prototype meaningfully. Striving for 

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

267

certainties is what helps you determine what to do, what to acquire, and what 
you need to learn. Learning reduces your tolerance for uncertainty; it is what 
you do to modulate risk and certainty. In practice, this means that you’ll in-
cur some costs to guarantee survival as you prepare for some eventualities, 
and that you’ll incur other costs to make your endeavor more robust through 
learning. In a sense, it’s what the astronaut analogy in chapter 7 aims to help 
you do with your innovation prototype. However, in the astronaut analogy, 
the predictably unforgiving nature of space makes it possible to use the laws 
of  physics  to  work  backward  from  the  one  risk—dying—that  trumps  all 
others.2

Absent natural laws that prescribe human behavior in the face of innova-
tions-in-the-making with the same certainty with which we can use physical 
laws to predict cause and effect, it is up to you to make decisions and trade-
offs between certainty and risk. In so doing, you shape the boundaries of the 
problem you solve.

When you put all this together, it becomes easier to come up with defini-
tions of risk, certainty, and uncertainty that are more specific than the gen-
eral ones at the beginning of this chapter—in other words, definitions that 
are more utilitarian. We can define them in relation to your innovating and 
to what you need to do to persevere in your inquiries about a problem.

You can choose to define risk as a probability measure associated with the 
outcomes of an event. It is the least you can hope for to understand how a 
“system” will react. That is the best you can do if you are external to that sys-
tem or if you have only a superficial understanding of how it might work—
for instance, if you have no information about a system other than its inputs 
and outputs, or if you have nothing but analogies, comparables, or some pri-
or beliefs with which to explain the system. (When it comes to painting a 
picture of risk, the comparables you use work much as parts do.)

You can choose to define certainty as a range of possibility. When you are 
embedded in a system and have the ability to make decisions that affect the 
system, you can generally outline ranges for parameters and the associated 

268 

CHAPTER 9

cause-and-effect relationships, and you can work with those parameters and 
ranges to learn to make your system more robust.

Because your job is to get a hunch out of your head and into the world, 
you cannot think of yourself as fully internal or fully external to a system. 
You need to learn to operate with both.

This is how you use these definitions. You use risk to:
•  Identify dreadful outcomes that motivate your interrogation into the 
problem, as in chapter 7. These outcomes may come from observations, 
your imagination, or insights you derive from people.
•  Summarize  to  others—investors,  for  example—what  you’ll  need  to 
learn as you scale up. This is a communication strategy to help others 
view your innovating in terms of your knowledge of the outcomes that 
would have you fail, and how prepared you are.
•  Inventory and revisit things you have decided not to control for di-
rectly through your innovating. Such an inventory includes everything 
external to you—elements in a value chain, for instance—and must in-
clude all the assumptions you have made. (An assumption, is, after all, 
something  you  chose  to  take  for  granted  and  thus  place  outside  your 
control.)
You use a desire for certainty to:
•  Specify the experiments and actions you need to do—that is, specify 
the  new  “truths”  you  need  to  acquire  to  counter  the  dreadful  conse-
quences of risk you imagine. These specifications emerge from the pro-
cess of questions in chapter 7, and specifically from your responses to the 
several variants of the “what might go wrong?” question motivated by 
your risks (as above).
•  Summarize for yourself the inventory of truths and ranges of possibil-
ity that are available to you in the space of opportunity you are building. 
These constitute the sequence of partial proofs of concepts you’ve built 
through your innovating.

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

269

•  Determine how you can make parts work together and what additional 
knowledge you require, and ultimately decide how to recombine parts 
and  insights  to  gain  control  over  the  space  of  opportunity  you  have 
created.
Put simply, from a doer’s perspective, risk and certainty are just variables 
with which you work. They help you define the boundaries of what you do. 
What is or is not under your control is something you are solving for as you 
innovate. You account for as risk all things external to your innovating, and 
you strive for certainty about all things internal to your innovating. (This 
implies that everything you decide to quantify with a probability, you have 
implicitly made external.) You can use the imagery supplied to you by the 
landscape of risks you create through your decisions to introduce that exis-
tential anguish you need to interrogate your problem and arrive at new cer-
tainties, as discussed in chapter 7. (Have I made the point about your ques-
tions needing some existential anguish?)

You learn as you progress in your endeavor. At each new scale, your toler-
ance for uncertainty changes, which forces you to make decisions that trade 
off risks to which you want to be exposed and certainties you require to move 
forward.

Risk—the traditional perspective

You can reconcile the doer’s perspective of risk with the more traditional 
perspective if you think of risk as a tool that helps you communicate the ro-
bustness with which you’ve endowed your project.

When innovating, we tend to characterize as risks everything external to 
us. We also typically assess risks using our backgrounds, comparables, and 
how likely it is that those risks will affect our purpose. When presented with 
the innovating of others, we tend to characterize their endeavors by the risks 
they pose to us. So, whenever you find yourself on the other side of advocacy—
that is, when others are advocating to you—you may equate risk with your 

270 

CHAPTER 9

own assessment of how likely you believe it is that the advocates will be able 
to use the resources they are asking for to accomplish what they set out to do. 
In making that assessment, you will use your background, those comparables, 
and ultimately your experience to judge others’ ability to deliver. A signifi-
cant part of that assessment will be based on whether you believe in the logic 
of what they propose, and on how that logic will help you believe risk is be-
ing reduced.

If you are advocating, it follows that, in addition to speaking about how 
inspiring your idea is, you will have to structure your story around what has 
been demonstrated so far and the actions you’ll do next to demonstrate even 
more:

•  The more tangible the demonstration of what you do have and know, 
the higher the perceived value of what you have achieved thus far and are 
bound to contribute going forward.
•  The more specific and believable your next steps, the lower the per-
ceived risk of investing in you.
•  The  clearer  the  distinction  between  your  current  knowns  and  un-
knowns, and how you will use resources to address the latter, the lower 
the perceived risk of investing in you.
•  The closer the analogies—the comparables you use—to what you en-
vision accomplishing, the lower the perception of risk.

How to determine what to account for as risk and which  
certainties to pursue

What you prepare to react to as a risk and what certainties you need to bring 
into the fold of your innovating depend largely on your tolerance for uncer-
tainty and how quickly you think you can react to what you see.

In a web startup, for instance, reaction time is as a rule of thumb nearly 
immediate. At the earliest scales in your innovation prototyping, reaction 

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

271

can also be quite immediate. For nearly every other type of endeavor, reac-
tion time is far from immediate. So, reaction time is connected with how 
quickly you can rearrange the parts of your innovating to learn something 
new at your current scale.

Similarly, your tolerance for uncertainty may be high, but the rest of your 
team, your investors, and/or your customers may think differently. So, toler-
ance for uncertainty is largely a function of the people you’ve accrued through 
your innovating. That means there is no formula for arriving at an optimum 
way to allocate your efforts between pursuing certainties and preparing for 
risk.

There is, however, a shortcut to minimizing risk. It requires your idea be 
about  a  product—even  if  you  have  no  real  certainty  about  it.  Here’s  the 
shortcut: Constrain your endeavor to the Web, an app, or any other domain 
in which you need only well-understood technologies that someone else has 
already commoditized for use at scale (e.g., databases, web retail, 3D print-
able designs, Web 3.0); focus your endeavor in an archetype of a person; pro-
duce something quickly—say, a minimum viable product; don’t think too 
much; set yourself up to monitor every activity around your product and 
survey everyone; and entrust your innovating to your ability to react quickly 
to whatever you observe.

The shortcut works mostly when scale can be trivially associated with 
the  number  of  people  who  buy  something  and  when  everything  else  you 
might need can be specified for contract manufacturing, mass distribution 
through someone else’s channels, or, in the case of data, can be deployed in a 
standard data center. In other words, it works when scaling up mostly means 
creating a specification and passing it on to a third party that already has a 
platform at the right scale. Then your risk strategy is to hedge the size of each 
batch of orders and manage your brand.

However, you are not limited to the shortcut. You can innovate on chal-
lenging problems, new technologies, and persistent social challenges with 
the same ease. All it takes is to realize that scaling up simply means figuring 
out how to systematize what you have learned through your innovating. For 
about the same effort it would take to monitor everyone who would fall prey 

272 

CHAPTER 9

to the allure of your minimum viable product, you can monitor the certain-
ties you need and the risks you have created continually and learn to scale up 
your innovating.

Whether you take the shortcut or not, the equilibrium between what 
you ought to acquire as a certainty and what you ought to account for as risk 
to  progress  to  the  next  scale  gets  defined  dynamically  by  what  you  do  as 
much as by the people with whom you interface.

How you explore that trade-off may be most easily understood as a game 
in the context of advocacy. I mean “game” here as in “game theory.” For our 
purposes, all you need understand about game theory is that it is a way to 
think about how the sequence of actions of people in different roles leads to 
some final state—an equilibrium—in which everyone wins the most he or 
she can win. In the imaginary game below, the roles are defined by having 
either the utilitarian perspective of risk or the traditional perspective.

As you engage in advocacy, for instance, you are enacting a game that 
ends at an equilibrium defined by some trade-off between certainty and risk.

A game of certainty and risk

There are two players in this game: you, with the utilitarian perspective of 
risk, and the person to whom you are advocating, who has a traditional per-
spective. Your role is to decrease the perception that there is risk by clearly 
articulating what you know and what you don’t know and asserting explicitly 
the things you’ll learn as you scale up. You do that by sorting through your 
uncertainties in the form of next steps and by supplying the other player with 
clear, tangible milestones that allow for easy comparison.

Regardless of what you assert, other player’s role is to identify and con-
strue as risks events that will result in losses. That is, the other player draws 
on his or her experience and background with parts, people, and scale similar 
to what you presented to inform his or her perception about two things: how 
likely  you  are  to  learn  all  you  need  to  learn  given  what  you  propose 

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

273

doing—that’s a probability measure—and whether he or she believes your 
logic effectively translates into the problem being solved in an interesting 
way. Here interest is measured by return on investment, social impact, or 
whatever.

Your objective is to help the other player understand the reality you are 
proposing to build together, aided by the tangibility of your prototype and 
by comparables used as parts. The other player’s objective is to assess whether 
the  problem  you  can  solve  together  is  worth  the  risk  he  would  have  to  
assume. He does this by identifying and pointing out key risks that challenge 
your  best  guesses  on  learning,  logic,  and  how  interesting  the  problem  
might be.

As you reach equilibrium, a trade-off between certainty and risk emerges. 
That equilibrium defines the new problem you and the other player would 
solve together, what can possibly be learned, the value of that learning, and 
how that learning might increase the robustness of your venture. (Of course, 
your new problem might imply changes to costs, resources, learning, toler-
ance for uncertainty, and what needs to be controlled by your innovating.)

If the price you pay for the other player’s perception of risk is acceptable 
to you and the cost to reduce uncertainty is acceptable to him or her, you’ve 
made a deal.

Practicing

As simple as the game may be to play, how to elucidate risks and certainties 
through conversation in a way that may be described as a game in the game-
theory sense is not obvious. I am asking you to walk into a process with an 
initial proposal and with an understanding that the actions that will follow 
striking a deal do not emerge from that proposal but from the sequence of 
conversations. Your initial proposal only helped initiate the process.

Whether the final outcome differs substantially from what you initially 
proposed doesn’t matter. The game is not about your initial proposal; it is 

274 

CHAPTER 9

about what you might build together with the other player—and that’s what 
both parties learn through the process. The outcome may involve changes in 
the proposal or in how certain aspects of the proposal are perceived. Making 
a deal involves more than just trading chips; there is also learning and rela-
tionship building.

What’s important about the outcome is that if the game is played fairly, 
the strategy that emerges at equilibrium is the one in which everybody wins 
the most given the players involved and their objectives. That, incidentally, is 
the only way to bring a forward-looking perspective on the meaning of “fair 
deal”  and  “win–win”  to  bear.  And  it  is  how  the  value  of  the  deal  gets 
defined.

To be sure, depending on the players, “winning” may mean walking away. 
Even then, you walk away having learned a lot. The time you spent trying to 
elucidate a fairer trade-off of certainties and risks with the other players is 
time you effectively spent changing how you view what you proposed. There 
are lessons in there—new insights. Just as you do after interfacing with peo-
ple (see chapter 4), you may incorporate some of those insights into a new 
initial proposal when you decide to start the game again with a new set of 
players.

Making the most of the game requires two things from you: that you 
walk into the game prepared and that you understand how to define that set 
of trade-offs through conversation.

Learning to elucidate value through that kind of a conversation—that is, 
as the outcome of a game—is so important a skill that it deserves a way to be 
practiced. In my classes, I give assignments that call for my students to prac-
tice just that. I call them Karate Kid Tasks, in the spirit of the first Karate Kid 
movie. You may recall that Mr. Miyagi puts Daniel-san to work doing several 
odious tasks. Daniel has come to Mr. Miyagi to learn karate, and cannot fath-
om how “wax on, wax off ” or “sand the floor” or “paint the fence” or “paint 
the house” has anything to do with that.

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

275

Karate Kid Task #1

Karate Kid Task #1 is called “That’s Not What That’s Worth.”

The task applies to many non-obvious contexts. Its objective isn’t just 
to strike a deal, but rather to determine the meaning of value jointly with 
someone else. Sometimes value is determined by the attributes of what is 
being proposed; at other times, it is determined by the effort it took to get 
a deal, measured in steps taken or in time expended. Often it is a com-
bination of the two ways of determining value.

First I ask students to go out and try to acquire something for a price 
other than what’s marked. They may do this at a store, or broaden the 
meaning of price and negotiate a school assignment, or something else. 
The key is to choose to do it in a setting where they perceive it will be 
impossible. Afterward, they share a one-paragraph description of their 
experience with their peers.

Their final deliverable is a one-page description of what they attempted 
to do, the outcome, and what caught their attention about what other 
students did. I use that as the basis to compose a lecture from their own 
experiences that ends with a discussion of the many contexts in which 
negotiation  applies,  negotiation  strategies,  how  it  all  links  to  existing 
references on negotiation, attitude, and how practice is useful even when 
the initial objective is not accomplished.

At the conclusion of the lecture, I ask the students to consider this an 
assignment for life: to practice what they just learned—that is, continue 
to practice arriving at better and different deals continually, using their 
everyday lives as the training ground. When the students, later in life, find 
themselves in the middle of a negotiation, they will know intuitively how 
to define value through the process.

Translating your innovation prototype into risks and 
certainties

The questions in chapter 7 prepare you to use your innovation prototype to 
explore the relationships between certainties and risk as a function of scale. 
The logic set forth in chapter 10 prepares you to explore the same relationships 

276 

CHAPTER 9

working backward from the large-scale problem as you plan your next steps 
and build milestones for growth. This chapter prepares you translate back 
and forth between chapters 7 and 10. Learning is related to your tolerance for 
uncertainty: The more you learn, the lower your tolerance. You may consider 
your evolving understanding of risks and the certainties you need to pursue 
as an indication of progress.

The  somewhat  unorthodox  mind-set  I  introduce  using  the  astronaut 
analogy in chapter 7 prepares you for what is typically referred to as de-risk-
ing. With that mind-set, you de-risk by assuming that:

•  whatever you are told is impossible can be made to work. In fact, it 
might actually provide a competitive advantage, but only if you figure 
out how to make the “impossible” actually work.
•  whatever seems reasonable or valid to you now cannot possibly work. 
Something is wrong about it, and it is up to you to find it and fix it.
By focusing on how you are wrong and trying to correct for it, you are 
already as risk-conservative as it gets, and so is your innovation prototype, no 
matter  how  seemingly  preposterous  the  underlying  idea.  That  is,  risk  has 
nothing to do with how preposterous a problem you focused on, but with 
how much you’ve let your idea charm you into not learning anything.

Risk has nothing to do with how preposterous  

a problem you focused, but with how much you’ve 

let your idea charm you into not learning anything.

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

277

After you’ve worked through questions like those in chapter 7, your in-
novation prototype contains a set of certainties, a logical chain of possibility, 
a set of problems that span a space of opportunity, and a set of proposed ac-
tions you can prioritize according to how they demonstrate what’s interest-
ing about the space of opportunity that emerged from your hunch. You’ve 
done  the  legwork  to  span  the  space  of  opportunity  with  several  distinct 
problems that can be solved and that you know how to vary; moreover, every 
action you propose to take next helps you advance in several of the problems 
that span the space of opportunity. Not only did you follow a risk-conserva-
tive approach to arrive here, but you’ve also kept open a diverse portfolio of 
problems that share similar proofs of concept. As far as traditional strategies 
to mitigate risk go, you are covered: you are risk-aware and diversified. You 
achieved this without sacrificing ambition. You need only translate your pro-
totype into a story of risks and certainties. Here’s how.

First, your objective is for your innovation prototype to aid your presen-
tations of risks in two ways. One is to demonstrate how certain things related 
to your problem are possible. That’s the value you contribute going into the 
conversation. The other is that your innovation prototype ought to make it 
easy to build a story that illustrates that what you propose doing next is be-
yond possible and is actually probable, meaning the odds ought to be at least 
somewhat better than 50-50. That’s why the experimental logic of validation 
would have led you astray.

Second, you use your landscape of opportunity. The problems that span 
the space of opportunity you’ve identified are actually a map of several ways 
in which one might achieve impact. The problems convey a diversified op-
portunity. The logical chain of possibility is the compass for navigating the 
space you have mapped with actions. It can help you articulate to others the 
dangers and risks that lurk in the space, as well as the certainties you need to 
overcome those risks.

Together, the actions you propose taking next, the logical chain of pos-
sibility, and the unknowns that remain suggest a learning progression. You 
could probably draw that progression: one node per action, each node with 
multiple possible outcomes, and the logical chain of possibilities explaining 

278 

CHAPTER 9

how to connect the dots. Each of the problems that span the space of oppor-
tunity maps into a region of your drawing; one or more of those problems 
shares each node. The degree to which the problems overlap indicates how 
the degree to which the opportunity is diversified.

Your job isn’t necessarily to share one such diagram with your conversa-
tional counterparts; it is to help others who have less information than you 
understand the risks and contribute their knowledge about that space. You 
do that by helping them see that there is a path to acquire certainties that will 
either ensure survival and create value or quickly show that the whole idea is 
not worth pursuing.

The  outcome  of  that  conversation  is  clarity  about  what  needs  to  be 
learned so the project can scale. Your job is to persuade yourself there is at 
least one, probably many, paths to scale, and to help others see that you walk 
those paths building on the same principle that has gotten you here and led 
you to demonstrate what is possible—that you will learn a disproportionate 
amount from the resources you have, which at this point means that you’ll 
learn to systematize your innovating so it scales.

Persuade yourself there is at least one, probably 

many, paths to scale. You do that by assuming that 

whatever you’re told is impossible can be made to 

work, and whatever seems reasonable to you now 

cannot possibly work.

 

RISK, DOING, LEARNING, AND UNCERTAINTY 

279

Takeaways

•  The traditional notion of risk is a probability measure. Risk is hit or miss. 
You’ll need to be conversant in that notion of risk when sharing your idea outside 
your circle; preparing for those conversations will be extremely helpful in your 
efforts to systematize your uncertainties. 
•  However, unless you think of your endeavor as gambling, that hit-or-miss no-
tion of risk is limiting. Your innovating requires you to be more alert regarding 
what you can do about what you think you know and don’t know. Simply listing 
risks is not an option; your options are doing or not doing.
•  What matters now is how well you’re prepared to handle uncertainty. That 
depends largely on whether you have banked your future on a single thing being 
true or whether your idea is robust and ready to survive changes.
•  When you think about risks, you think about what happens when something 
that is external to you goes wrong and how to brace for it. When you think about 
certainty, you think about the specific truths you need to progress and the ac-
tions you can take to acquire those truths. You need to account for all those 
things. Your counterparts in an advocacy setting, for instance, will see them all as 
risks in the traditional way. 
•  Show a learning path through a space of opportunity that reduces everyone’s 
tolerance for uncertainty, and that explains how you intend to trade off certainty 
and risk as you scale up so that you do not fail because of something you could 
have predicted and/or been prepared to remedy.
•  Remember, there is no risk at the outset. When risk enters the picture is largely 
a matter of scale. 

•  Because you created that risk in the first place, you can make it a habit to ask: 
“What risk did I create today?” If you do not like it as a risk, either change what 
you did or figure out what new thing needs to be true so you can like what 
remains of that risk after you learn something new. 

280 

CHAPTER 9

•  If you absolutely must fail, make it come as a surprise to you and everyone, so 
everyone cherishes what he or she learns.

     10
10

scaling up an organization     

Organizations don’t just grow on their own. You build them. Watering isn’t 
enough.

After advocating for the larger reality you imagine, and getting the go-
ahead, it would be only natural to think that all you have left to do is build 
the scaffold that supports the story arc you advocated—that is, as I illustrate 
in the figure that follows, place a scaffold under the curve in figure 8.1 (see 
chapter 8).  

As it turns out, that mind-set is rather limiting and risky. It is limiting 
because it assumes that you have to know accurately today what will be need-
ed when your organization is far bigger. You are leaving little room for being 
wrong, and by now you may have grown fond of progressing by being pro-
ductively wrong. It is also limiting because it makes things such as milestones 
and series A, B, C investment hard to place on a timeline. And it is risky, be-
cause scale-up would then hinge mostly on the size of the market you imag-
ined—that is, an externality.

The story arc that served you for advocacy is not a story of growth; it is a 
story of an imaginary and compelling future—the larger organization—that 

Growth as seen from a distance.

lives  several scales above the innovation prototype you used to show it is 
possible. Growth happens in that middle you glossed over.    

You build your organization by shifting your focus to that thrilling mid-
dle you had merely glossed over because it was too nuanced to make up the 
backbone of your advocacy story.

This chapter is about that middle. It also shows you how to use the same 
logic of problem solving that I have developed throughout this book to build 
an organization.

It follows from the examples given in the box “Growing a New Organiza-
tion Atop an Old One” that thinking about building the scaffold of the larg-
er organization you imagine might be as stressful as I note in chapter 1 with 

286 

CHAPTER 10

respect to finding an earth-shattering idea. You are better off thinking of 
your curve as supported by a scaffold that at the very least evolves over time, 
if not changes entirely. You are building the first scaffold.

You may take that reasoning further and adopt the position that you’ll 
end  up  building  multiple  organizations,  each  one  atop  the  previous  one. 
That would mean that you do not even have to worry about whether a deci-
sion is optimal for the larger reality—it just needs to work today. As you 
build the next organization, you’ll reuse parts from the old one and you’ll get 
to implement everything you learned from the previous one. Eventually the 
new organization might take over what the old one did and do it more sim-
ply than you can do it now.

As you build the next organization, you’ll reuse 

parts from the old one and you’ll get to implement 

everything you learned from the previous one.

Incidentally, this view of growth as a sequence of increasingly larger orga-
nizations—each  new,  each  an  innovation  prototype  for  the  next—solves 
many of those problems that emerge as convoluted questions when you try 
to reason your way through innovation in hindsight. For instance, you might 
ask “When do I stop innovating?” The answer is “Never.” You continue to 
apply the lessons of chapters 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 ad infinitum, just as a physician 
applies what she learns throughout her career. And you continue to learn.

You might ask “Can I be a serial innovator or entrepreneur?” The answer 
is “Sure.” Being an innovator or an entrepreneur is a profession, just as medi-
cine is. You drop your old hunch (perhaps now an organization), much as a 

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

287

Growing a New Organization Atop an Old One

It is easy to trace how Apple evolved from its Apple I into iPods and 
all the way to today’s App Store and make sense of it—in hindsight. It 
is not so easy to imagine how you might have built the Apple of today 
from the organization it was in its earliest years. (You can read about 
it  in  a  book  titled  Accidental  Empires,  which  includes  an  outsider’s 
contemporaneous  account  of  the  company’s  early  days.*)  In  many 
ways, Apple did not just grow; rather, it transformed itself.

The  same  could  be  said  for  Netflix,  the  example  with  which  I 
opened  part  II  of  the  book.  A  2006  USA  Today  article  describes 
Netflix’s founder, Reed Hastings, as having upended the DVD rental 
business  and  getting  the  company  ready  for  an  “eventual  shift  to 
downloads.”**  In  2008,  Hastings  told  the  Wall  Street  Journal  about 
partnering  to  create  a  set-top  box  to  stream  movies  to  Internet-
connected  televisions.***  In  2010,  Forbes  published  a  piece  advising 
investors to “short” Netflix stock, comparing the company’s strategic 
mistakes  to  those  of  AOL.  In  2011,  the  New  York  Times  again 
interviewed Hastings, revisiting his mistakes, addressing the drop in 
share  prices,  and—for  the  first  time—discussing  whether  Netflix 
competed with HBO.**** In the five intervening years from the first to 
last article cited here, Netflix went from competing with Blockbuster 
and Walmart, to being equated with the AOL failure, to competing 
with  HBO  and  Amazon—admitting  to  having  made  mistakes  all 
along. Judging by the nature of the competitors attributed to Netflix, 
one might argue it was in fact three different companies.

For one last example, consider Harry Schechter, CEO and founder of 
temperaturealert—an Internet of Things company—and a regular guest 
speaker in my classes, where he has been chronicling the evolution of his 
company. He shared with students that, after looking back on the growth 
spurt  that  had  resulted  in  his  company’s  growing  by  an  order  of

288 

CHAPTER 10

magnitude, he felt as though he had built a new company atop the  
old one.

 *Robert  X.  Cringely,  Accidental  Empires:  How  the  Boys  of  Silicon  Valley  Make  Their 
Millions, Battle Foreign Competition, and Still Can’t Get a Date (Viking, 1992).

 **Jim Hopkins, “‘Charismatic’ founder keeps Netflix adapting,” USA Today, April 24, 2006 
(http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/tech/products/services/2006-04-23-netflix-ceo_x.htm).

 ***Jason  Riley,  “Movie  man,”  Wall  Street  Journal,  February  9,  2008  (http://www.wsj.com/

articles/SB120251714532955425).

****Panos  Mourdoukoutas,  “Can  Netflix  correct  its  strategic  mistakes?”  Forbes,  October  10,  2011 
 
(http://www.forbes.com/sites/panosmourdoukoutas/2011/10/10/can-netflix-correct-its-strate-
gic-mistakes/#2715e4857a0b7ac0297f3bbc);Andrew Goldman, “Reed Hastings knows he messed 
up,”  New  York  Times,  October  20,  2011  (http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/23/magazine/talk-
reed-hastings-knows-he-messed-up.html).

physician may move her practice elsewhere. You walk away with what you 
learned, and move on to the next hunch or hospital.

You might also ask “How might an incumbent innovate?” Incumbents 
innovate by leveraging everything that supports their current core compe-
tency—that is, what they have learned—to support their new core compe-
tency. After all, if you are that incumbent, someone was going to challenge 
your current core competency—sooner or later. It might as well be you.

What you need to do is not unlike what you’ve done to get to this point—
that is, everything I’ve discussed is practice for what comes next. You con-
tinue to work with parts and people, you systematize, your innovating scales 
up, and an increasingly larger organization results. Others will see that your 
organization grows.

 

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

289

Organizations don’t just grow on their own

Why is what I write in chapter 8 about the curve not enough for building an 
organization? It’s because the curve is missing the middle. (The drawn curve 
does have a middle, but what it represents excludes what I will explain as the 
middle.)

The curve encompasses everything you’ve done so far and the future that 
you’ve promised—that is, the “final” destination you’re aiming for—defined 
by  a  market,  a  self-sustaining  business  model,  and  the  comparables  you 
brought together to stitch together the semblance of an organization. All 
you have is an innovation prototype, a request for resources, and an enticing 
future  that  lives  several  scales  above  where  you  are  today.  That’s  why  the 
shape of the curve resembles a hockey stick.

The middle is the building of your organization. It’s what you’re doing 
now. It obviously has what you’ve done up until today as its foundation, and 
it is obviously heading toward the future. But whereas in chapter 8 the curve 
only implies a middle, here you have to extend it.

In your advocacy, you presented an innovation prototype that illustrated 
at scale a vision that implied an organization with distribution channels like 
those of some other organization, a business model like that of Company Y, 
a strategy like the one employed by Company V, a battery of offerings emerg-
ing from a platform similar to the platforms those two organizations have, 
and customers like those of Company Z. It may also have had analytics and 
“Big Data” or whatever is fashionable at the time you read this—all parts. 
The organization your prototype implied solved a problem.

Let’s say you succeeded in your advocacy and got the funding you were 
seeking. Then, you built an organization according to a business model differ-
ent from what you had envisioned and advocated, or some variant of what you 
had presented. It is not as if you lied. As you advocated, you surely addressed 
what you would do with the money right away in the form of next steps and 
milestones. You sold a future, and you were given leeway to try and build it 
under whatever conditions exist and with what you learn along the way.

290 

CHAPTER 10

You have a problem you’ve solved for, and that from which you can work 
backward. You have an innovation prototype you’ve built at scale that dem-
onstrated the large-scale problem, that is by now fairly sophisticated and ripe 
for systematization, and that represents an organization implicitly. It includes 
a problem statement redefined through advocacy and a scaffold of certain-
ties needed and risks to anticipate. You can view your innovation prototype 
as a plan for how to solve the problem. In a way you have already solved the 
problem—except your solution is at the wrong scale, and it would be really 
difficult for anyone else to benefit from it now. You need to develop the solu-
tion at scale.

That is your starting point.

You scale up by discovering what about your 

prototype is less sensitive to scale and by finding 

ways to systematize what you’ve learned.

Growth as scaling up

In problem solving, as you prepare your solution for “prime time,” you don’t 
explain how you came up with the solution. Rather, you show others how to 
solve it. That requires working backward from the problem being solved, 
verifying your solution, and finding ways to simplify steps. You grow by scal-
ing up in the same way.

As a first approximation, you can think of growth as a consequence of 
scaling up. Simply put, scale-up is about doing more of what you just did at a 

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

291

lower cost per unit. That’s quite similar to the operating principle introduced 
in chapter 3: Learn a disproportionate amount with the resources you have now. 
You scale up by discovering what about your prototype is less sensitive to 
scale and by finding ways to systematize what you’ve learned. As you system-
atize, you are simplifying your solution. Those who will benefit from your 
innovating will be able to verify it as a solution to their problem only when it 
has become simple enough for them to use for their own purposes.

As you simplify, the prototype and everything you learn from it become 
new parts and insights. Systematizing your prototype allows you to transi-
tion  to  managing  the  organization  that  emerges  from  the  prototype  and 
gives you the bandwidth you need to tackle the larger unknowns you were 
unable to address at the previous scale.

Put another way, systematizing now mostly means trimming the “fat” 
from the parts and insights you’ve used (that is, designing parts that will do 
just what you need), making those parts and insights work together robustly, 
verifying each truth (i.e., the certainties you need to acquire), specifying ev-
erything so others can carry out your specifications, and beginning to work 
on identifying the unknowns you had left for now (i.e., for a later scale).

As you systematize at this scale, you’ll find opportunities to start to make 
real some of those non-material parts described in chapter 3 that you may 
have only diagrammed, enacted, or emulated. You may need to build organi-
zational functions, processes, workflows, development functions (business 
or otherwise), and hire people, and so on. Now is the time when some of the 
concepts from management about organizations, entrepreneurship, and in-
novation begin to acquire the increasingly specific meaning that gives them 
strength.

How scale-up works in manufacturing suggests a good analogy to what 
you need to accomplish. As with a large industrial complex, your working 
organization needs to ramp up to achieve the efficiency with which it will 
someday operate. Consider, for example, the process from discovery of a new 
chemical reaction to production. In the lab, a reaction occurs in several steps, 
executed  with  several  different  pieces  of  equipment,  much  like  you  work 
with parts in your innovation prototype. At the other end of scale-up, at 

292 

CHAPTER 10

production, the same reaction will occur at a radically different scale across 
different pieces of industrial equipment (the more standardized the better, 
the fewer steps the better). Even the stages of the reaction may be executed 
differently. There will be different environmental conditions, gauges, sen-
sors, a control room, automation, safety measures and inspections, and regu-
latory  compliance  considerations.  The  organization  will  have  a  business 
model,  do  cost analysis, meet standards, attempt to make the most of each 
product and by-product, have environmental considerations, need transporta-
tion, and so on.

At production scale, simplifying to remove one step can make a world of 
difference in benefits; in the lab, it doesn’t matter so much. In the lab, maxi-
mum  yield  can  remain  theoretical;  in  production,  you  produce  what  you 
produce. The difference is so stark that every single scale-up operation goes 
through at least one pilot phase precisely for the purpose of verifying and 
simplifying all the things that could only be assumed at a smaller scale.

The analogy with an industrial complex is useful for understanding what 
goes into conceiving a scale-up plan and the reasons why you need such a 
plan. Two things are particularly important. The first is the one more widely 
acknowledged: A progression from lab to pilot to production demonstrates 
the viability of the process and establishes real expectations for production. 
Many new challenges emerge along the way that test the initial idea and will 
require significant engineering, at the same time making it necessary to fig-
ure out ways to handle, recycle, and (one hopes) extract a benefit not only 
from the main item produced but also from all the by-products. It becomes 
impossible to reason about engineering and management in isolation from 
each other. To be sure, while a pilot plant is nowhere close in yield to a pro-
duction  plant,  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  minimum-viable-product 
concept. The pilot plant is fundamentally not a viable plant from an eco-
nomic standpoint; it’s value stems from what it demonstrates. It is a proof of 
concept that something is possible; it is a reproduction at scale of the larger 
problem you’ll solve, though the scale is already larger than that of your ear-
lier proof of concept (the lab). It can be the next innovation prototype.

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

293

Growth as a sequence of organizations that operate at different scales.

294 

CHAPTER 10

The second is generally given less consideration but is probably more 
important: The sequence from lab to pilot to production generally unfolds 
in different plants. What is carried from one plant to the next is what has 
been learned; the systematization of the process along this trajectory justifies 
the next investment in capital resources. The smaller plant may be kept for 
production, repurposed, or in the case of contract manufacturing left to the 
next client. It may be kept running to generate revenue with which to fund 
the development of the production plant. Most of the employees who learned 
with the organization move on to the next plant.

It might help you think about the organization you are building in much 
the same way, because it is generally easier to imagine a working organization 
by analogy with other organizations of similar size than to plan or even un-
derstand with the precision you need the many transitions an organization 
needs to undergo to achieve the “dream” scale. Still, though, you may keep on 
using the dream scale for inspiration. Once you learn enough with the first 
version of your organization, it will be easier in your next scale-up to create a 
second, new organization than to morph the first one—and so on as you 
grow. The second organization you build will “cannibalize” the first: People 
will carry over, and you may end up running both organizations concurrently 
for a while. But at some point it will probably be easier to serve the needs 
once addressed by the first organization with the more efficient second orga-
nization, and to dispense with the first.

You have some choices. Imagine your path to the dream scale as growing 
a single organization or as building successive new ones atop older ones. On 
the first path, you may end up stressing over how to grow the single organiza-
tion to do things it was never designed to do in the first place. Considering 
how much learning is involved, by the time you actually know what you are 
supposed to do you realize how ineffective the old organization really is. You 
need to simplify. But because you’re on the single-organization path, that 
means trying a reorganization—which is what large corporations opt for at 
this point.

On the second path, creating a new organization on top of the old one, 
you can salvage parts from the older organization as well as everything you’ve 

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

295

learned so the new organization is effective at that next level. The old orga-
nization partially funds the building of the next. Eventually, you figure out a 
way for the new organization to do what was worth keeping from what the 
old one did, and you can “kill off ” the old one altogether.

Does the latter path—successive organizations atop older ones—work if 
you ever become a large corporation? If you become big enough, the new 
organization that gets built will cannibalize units of the larger, existing orga-
nization. IBM and some other companies seem to have been doing that for 
quite some time.

The history of IBM is consistent with what I explain here about innova-
tion through the creation of entirely new companies. In Mastering the Dy-
namics of Innovation,1 James Utterback recounts the story of IBM from type-
writers  to  mainframes  to  personal  computers,  and  points  out  that  IBM’s 
success seems to have hinged upon the foresight of creating a PC division 
with access to IBM’s powerful brand and negotiating power but that was 
otherwise isolated from the Mainframes division it eventually cannibalized. 
Since 1994, when Utterback’s book came out, IBM has done the same thing 
several more times. It sold its lucrative laptop business to Lenovo to focus on 
its  consulting  and  services  business,  and  since  that  happened  Deep  Blue 
evolved out of Deep Thought to become a chess master and then Watson the 
Jeopardy champion, and continues to evolve through a series of reinventions 
of the original idea.

The evolution of IBM is consistent with the picture of growth through 
creation of entirely new organizations within the old. In contrast with ex-
plicit approaches to planned obsolescence or cannibalization, the decision to 
create a new unit responds to a perceived opportunity—a hunch—and not 
to a desire to end an existing business unit. The decision to end an existing 
business unit seems to be made later, when the two business units can actu-
ally be compared. The new unit might also absorb what the old unit did or 
collaborate with it. This is what seems to be happening as of the writing of 
this book with the cloud services division IBM Watson, as the company ac-
crues new “Big Data” interests such as health care.

Whatever  your  choice—growing  through  reorganization  or  building 
atop the old—what you do to scale up remains the same: identify and verify 

296 

CHAPTER 10

invariants (the things that remain constant at whatever scale), discover new 
problems, and learn what actually happens when you do it so you can further 
systematize. At every next scale, what you have is a new “plant.”

Early on, when the scale-up step is bigger than your current organization 
(e.g., you jump from having twenty employees to having sixty in a very short 
time), describing what you are doing each time as “building a new organiza-
tion” may be more accurate and a better depiction of the enormous manage-
ment and organizational feat involved. You can think of growth as the orga-
nizational equivalent of a code rewrite.

Scaling up an organization as problem solving

As mentioned above, you can also think of growing an organization as prob-
lem solving. You have an innovation prototype that—like a figure in tradi-
tional problem solving—represents all the elements of your problem solved. 
Your prototype should by now include everything discussed up to chapter 7 
as well as the outcome of systematizing for advocacy and risks emerging from 
chapters 8 and 9. In chapter 8 I discuss how to practice advocacy to reason 
and restate the large-scale problem with precision, and in chapter 9 I discuss 
how to reason about a problem from the inside out and back in to fine-tune 
what needs to be done in terms of certainties and risks. That raises the point 
that advocacy and risk assessment as discussed in chapters 8 and 9 are impor-
tant components of your innovation prototype on their own, regardless of 
whether you seek outside investment.

You may need to work first on a related and more accessible problem, 
which may emerge from recombining different aspects of the logical chain of 
possibilities and the problems that span the space of opportunity.

A sequence of proofs of concept

The  next  step  is  to  break  the  large  problem  into  smaller,  more  accessible 
problems. That can be seen to mean many things. From the perspective of a 

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

297

solver, a more accessible problem may be any of those you produce in chapter 
7 that you know are interrelated. From the perspective of an investor, a more 
accessible problem may mean an adjacent market. From the perspective of 
this book, a more accessible problem may also mean a proof of concept. All 
these examples really point to the same idea: Once the more accessible prob-
lem is solved, you’ll be able to point to the organization that solves it as a 
demonstration of something; it will help you understand better the larger 
problem; and it will allow you to begin to systematize aspects of your future 
larger-scale solution. You’ll also be able to use what you demonstrated as a 
proof of concept with future partners of what you will do next, and use as-
pects of what you put together as a part at the next scale.

In a sense, your smaller problem is an innovation prototype of what’s to 

come next.

Why is this growth? The parts and people of scale

That last idea summarizes the convenience of this approach. You work only 
on the middle: You change what you have based on the certainties you ac-
quire, make your organization work, and you get a new set of truths needed 
to progress to the next scale. If your current endeavor produces enough mon-
ey, you use it to fund scale-up. If it does not, you raise more. Each time you 
raise more money, you’re advocating. Every sale of a product comes from 
advocacy. Each time you advocate, you are explaining to your potential part-
ners  the  big  new  thing  you’ll  build  together  given  what  you  have  already 
demonstrated as possible, probable, and doable.

This should help you reconcile with the curse of innovation as stated in 
chapter 1: It is easy to get caught up with the final result we imagine—the in-
novation—and believe it ought to be recognizable as such during the process. As 
you begin to think about your innovation backward, from the end, you get 
to  think  of  and  use  everything  known  about  innovations  in  hindsight  as 
parts in your scale up. In other words, you get to benefit from all that knowl-
edge without the distraction that comes from the delusion of grandeur be-
lieved necessary to come up with an earth-shattering idea.

298 

CHAPTER 10

This may seem complicated, but it’s actually rather straightforward scale-
up logic: You present what you did (the past) to motivate where you will go 
(the future), but what you work on is that middle (the present). Most emerg-
ing organizations (commercial, social, or whatever) fail because they scale up 
to the future having ignored the entire present.

Working in the present: establishing next steps and milestones

The logical chain of possibility you see when you look at your innovation 
prototype tells you the certainties you need to acquire and their priority. 
Those are your paths to scale. Look at:

•  the parts of your prototype. You need to make them work together in a 
way that requires less craft. Each requires a special design. Remove what 
is not needed and enhance what is needed to make it manufacturable to 
spec at a predictable cost.
•  the unknowns you left for later. They signal ways in which you need to 
make parts work together so you can define the next batch of truths.
•  all the things you assumed. They must be verified.
•  how you acquired people. Now you need to systematize that process 
and help people work together.
•  all the non-material parts you diagrammed or enacted. Now they must 
be made tangible—that is, be done either by new (material) parts or by 
new people.
In essence, you must walk backward from every single aspect of your pro-
totype and simplify and systematize it so you can delegate to someone else. 
Your job is to manage all that while focusing on continuing to innovate so 
you can conquer the next scale, the next market, or the next proof of concept 
or demonstration—whatever name you give it.

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

299

The logical chain of possibility you see when you 

look at your innovation prototype tells you the 

certainties you need to acquire and their priority. 

Those are your paths to scale.

Recipe to Outline Next Steps

At this point, your innovation prototype likely supports several competing 
variants of the problem that gives you purpose. You may call each of these 
a hypothesis, an experiment, a problem, or an opportunity. They are all 
fairly tangible, but perhaps you wonder which one to focus on. Wondering 
that means you do not have enough information. You need to get that 
information before you can address that question.

Note that nonlinearity virtually guarantees that, no matter where you 
begin, you are likely to land somewhere other than where you now think 
you’ll land. There will come a time when you will be able to make sense of 
why you landed where you landed. For now, you need a different way to 
come up with next steps other than just focusing on one of those variants.
The best way to think about next steps is not to follow any specific 
milestone roadmap for a single problem. Rather, gather all of the items 
you’ve identified as critical assumptions, critical certainties, and risks with 
which you’ve built the logical chain of possibility, and do the following:

1. Compare them and address the most pressing ones. Your 
purpose remains to seize the entire space of opportunity, not to be 
right about any one problem in particular.
2. Turn each into an action, which you can do by asking yourself 
how you can prove or demonstrate this or that with less money. If 
you haven’t already done so, you may apply the same logic of 
questioning I discuss in chapter 7.

300 

CHAPTER 10

3. Rank your “needs for evidence” by how much that evidence may 
contribute to clarifying or dismissing any single variant. These are 
your “truths.” 
4. Several of those truths will be organizational; some will be 
technical. To assess them, you will have to assess the effort implied 
and the organizational elements you need to carry those truths 
forward, some of which you need to build.

Those (step 4) are your next steps. Your first milestone is the summary 
of what you’ll demonstrate upon completing them (from step 2) and the 
degree of systematization you’ll have achieved (from step 4).

The organization that systematizes your current innovation prototype is 
your first big milestone. The big experiments emerging from your logical 
chain of possibilities are your immediate next steps.

To be sure, you are working backward from the problem—the very one 

you worked hard to illustrate by way of your innovation prototype.

Doing more with less; leveraging all you practiced

So many things have to change from beginning to end, and it’s harmful to 
assume you are already operating with the super-effective means of the future 
organization. That assumption makes it so much more difficult to do what 
you actually need to do. That is why I have presented “growth” in a way that 
is not typical.

This way of viewing growth also helps you see the connections across 
scales. If you bring the problem down to table scale, that first “downwards” 
section of the curve might be affordable to you. Once you have an innova-
tion prototype, you’ll have to use it to help others see the larger picture you’ll 
be able to build together as suggested by the prototype—in other words, 
you’ll have to engage in advocacy.

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

301

Making Organizations Work at Scale

The management literature abounds with work on how to structure for 
growth  and  on  how  to  make  organizations  work.  I  point  to  further 
readings in the epilogue to this book. This chapter does not aim to replace 
any of that literature; rather, my objective is to help you see how growth 
relates to scale and to learning so you may use many of the skills you’ve 
sharpened through your innovating to specify the growth objectives you 
will then need to manage.

Your  innovating  prepares  you  to  grow  an  organization  and  take 
advantage  of  the  management  literature  on  the  topic  of  how  to  make 
organizations work and grow—although it may not seem immediately 
apparent.

In reality, the sophistication of parts and the roles people play change 
with scale, just as the problem itself changes. You can no longer gloss over 
certain  aspects.  Parts  that  you  may  have  been  able  to  get  away  with 
emulating at smaller scales (such as distribution channels or manufacturing 
challenges)  gain  tangibility.  The  need  for  specialized  management 
knowledge  increases.  However,  everything  I’ve  discussed  so  far  about 
how  to  make  your  problem  increasingly  tangible  with  what  you  have 
remains valid at the present scale.

What  changes  is  that  with  scale  comes  an  opportunity  to  apply 
everything we know about how make an organization work effectively. 
What you have learned about innovating helps you stay one step ahead. It 
helps you make the objectives for that growth tangible, and it equips you 
with  a  means  to  assess  whether  your  organization  is  indeed  working 
toward the goal you imagine. It also helps you separate what you’ve built 
so  far  (an  innovation  prototype)  from  what  you  aspire  to  build  going 
forward (the next problem solved). Economies of scale do not emerge 
from reusing or fine-tuning the product you built, but from building the 
next product anew—incorporating into it everything you now know and 
leveraging, if not repurposing, some elements of the infrastructure you 
built as parts.

302 

CHAPTER 10

At the time of advocacy, it is often difficult to gauge the difference be-
tween data and evidence. It takes time to arrive at the evidence needed to 
support  the  future  vision.  Typically,  evidence  that  an  opportunity  is  real 
emerges along the way, and it comes with learning that guides scale-up steps. 
That  is  often  when  it  becomes  apparent  that  a  “rewrite”  or  rebuilding  is 
needed.

For example, Sergey Brin and Larry Page reportedly developed and “took 
live” a search engine called Backrub at Stanford University in 1996. It was 
shut down shortly thereafter because it reportedly used too much network 
capacity—that is, it had scale problems. The new search engine they created 
led to Google, founded in 1998.

In the language of this book, Backrub was a first innovation prototype—
one that did not scale up well but was working. It helped Brin and Page learn 
enough to build a prototype that actually scaled. It wasn’t until four years 
later, when Google AdWords was launched with 350 customers, that actual 
evidence of the search engine’s value to online advertising became available.
The first social network Mark Zuckerberg created, Facemash, went live 
on Harvard University’s network in 2003. Numerous difficulties involving 
network and organizational issues emerged, suggesting the need for a code 
rewrite.  Facemash,  like  Backrub,  was  an  innovation  prototype.  Facebook 
emerged about two years later, and implementation of an ad strategy fol-
lowed in 2008. The advertising strategy would finally produce genuine evi-
dence of the platform’s marketing potential.

Genentech, one of the world’s first biological pharmaceutical companies, 
was founded in 1976, building on academic research into recombinant DNA. 
A year later, the company produced a human protein (somatostatin) in E. 
coli for the first time. In subsequent years, Genentech scientists successfully 
cloned insulin and growth hormone. Genentech’s first clinical trials of hu-
man insulin began in 1980. Both the academic research and the early Genen-
tech research that produced the first somatostatin were innovation proto-
types. It wasn’t until clinical trials commenced, four years after its founding, 
that Genentech began to accrue real evidence of safety and efficacy of that 
biological drug.

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

303

Together, these examples illustrate the progression of growth through 
“rebuilding” and learning to scale up. They also suggest, contrary to com-
monly held beliefs, that there may not be a big difference between software 
companies  and  high-capital-intensive  companies  with  respect  to  the  time 
required to get from a first hunch to evidence. That is, restricting attention 
to a single product, building on largely commoditized platforms, or rushing 
to market may not necessarily get you there any sooner, but scaling up will. It 
still  took  about  four  years  for  both  Google  and  Genentech  to  get  to 
evidence.

If you are “bought” at some later stage, you’ll also advocate for what the 
acquirers will be able to build next with what you have demonstrated. Even 
then you are advocating for a future. Whenever you are selling a product or a 
service, you advocate to the prospective buyers that they will be able to ac-
complish more with than without it; it should be the same if you are selling 
the entire organization.

It’s the same when you discuss with potential strategic partners. You are 
advocating the future you’ll build together on the basis of what you’ve dem-
onstrated. It is always the same: You build a working proof of concept, and 
you advocate for a viable, believable, and better future.

There is a corollary to all this. By the time you’ve “grown” your organiza-
tion, it may turn out to solve an altogether different problem than the one 
you spoke about in your “beauty pageant” days. The people who may have 
cared back then walked the path with you and influenced the evolution of 
the problem. They won’t care whether the future you envisioned back in the 
day corresponds exactly to what the present has turned out to be; they are 
happy if it has grown. Everyone for whom you actually solved a problem will 
be delighted. No one else really matters.

It follows that the super-duper beautiful problem you used to build your 
advocacy story—the beautiful idea that got you started—no longer matters. 
It mattered then because it helped people believe in you and because you 
believed in it. Whether it ever mattered after that is hard to say.

304 

CHAPTER 10

Takeaways

•  Organizations don’t just grow on their own. You build them. You may end 
up building multiple organizations, each one atop the previous one.
•  The story arc that served you for advocacy is not a story of growth; it is a 
story of an imaginary and compelling future—the larger organization—that 
lives several scales above the innovation prototype you used to show it is 
possible. 
•  It’s straightforward scale-up logic: You present what you did (the past) to 
motivate where you will go (the future), but what you work on is the middle 
(the present). Most emerging organizations (commercial, social, or whatev-
er) fail because they build for the future having ignored the entire present. 
But you do not have to worry about whether a decision is optimal for that 
rosy future—it just needs to work today.
•  As you build the next organization, you’ll reuse parts from the old one. 
You’ll get to implement everything you’ve learned. You systematize, your in-
novating scales up, and an increasingly larger organization results. Eventually 
the  new  organization  takes  over  what  the  old  one  did  and  does  it  more 
simply.
•  Growth and scale-up work like problem solving; no one cares how you 
first came up with the solution. You work backward from the problem being 
solved, you verify your solution, and you find ways to simplify steps. You 
grow by scaling up in the same way: discovering what about your prototype 
is less sensitive to scale; finding ways to systematize what you’ve learned so 
you simplify your solution. The prototype and everything you learn from it 
become new parts and insights. Systematizing your prototype allows you to 
transition to managing the organization that emerges.
•  The organization that systematizes your current innovation prototype is 
your first big milestone.

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

305

•  Once you learn enough with the first version of your organization, it will 
be easier in your next scale-up to create a second, new organization than to 
morph the first one—and so on as you grow.
•  There is a corollary to all this. By the time you’ve “grown” your organiza-
tion, it may turn out to solve an altogether different problem than the one 
you spoke about in your “beauty pageant” days. No one cares.

306 

CHAPTER 10

308 

CHAPTER 10

 

SCALING UP AN ORGANIZATION 

309

310 

CHAPTER 10

     11
11

managing innovating 

continuously     

Innovating—bringing together parts, people, and scale in a way not done 
before—is something you do continually; innovation is the afterthought.

You can create the conditions for innovating anywhere. In fact, you can 

turn innovating into a continuous process.

Chapter 8 introduces the growth curve as a way to connect your imag-
ined larger reality back to your innovation prototype. The curve is an admis-
sion that serious scale up is needed, no matter how probable and doable the 
endpoint. Chapter 9 supplies you with strategies to ascertain certainties and 
risks with which to increase the resolution at which you look at the “middle”
of the curve. Chapter 10 further increases the resolution of the curve and 
suggests that growth—particularly high growth—may not be distinguish-
able from layering a new organization atop the old one, in much the same 
way you layered proof of concept upon proof of concept in earlier chapters: 
by  repurposing  parts  and  insights  and  learning  to  scale.  The  “old”

In this chapter, I offer an alternate answer: Be the challenger by having a 
process for innovating continually. The process helps you use everything you 
have now as an auxiliary part. Its purpose isn’t just to create a new product, 
although that could be an outcome, 
but to help you explore continually 
for updates to the problem your or-
ganization solves—without concern 
for  your  current  core  competency. 
With  the  approach  to  documenta-
tion I discuss in chapter 12, the pro-
cess  can  help  you  explore  all  other 
uses  for  everything  you’ve  already 
built, or currently have or do.

innovation is the 

do continually; 

afterthought.

Innovating is 

something you 

organization—no matter how big—thus becomes an innovation prototype 
or a set of parts you already have.

Put this way, growth can be a consequence of innovating continually, not 
of innovation. The question that remains, then, is how to know when to start 
innovating. A common answer—a stress-inducing one—is that you want to 
do it before a challenger makes you obsolete. If you are a startup, the com-
mon answer is “before you run out of money.” If you are a research lab, the 
common answer is “when the technology is ready to get out of the lab.” These 
are all truisms.

This is unusual in that innovat-
ing may be less about building from 
what  you  now  consider  to  be  your 
core  competency—whether  it  be  knowledge  or  product—than  about  ac-
cepting that you may venture out of what you now think of as your core 
competency. Everything you once had built to support that core competency—
what you already know how to do and what you already have— can be your 
innovating advantage. This follows directly from my discussion in parts I 
and II of this book. When an innovation finally emerges, you’ll be able to 
explain in hindsight how it evolved from your core competency; before then, 
your core competency—what you already know how to do, and everything 

312 

CHAPTER 11

that  supports  you  in  doing  it—is  an  asset.  You  cannot  let  it  become  a 
constraint.

This chapter describes principles to implement innovating as a process as 
they might apply in a corporate setting. The same principles could easily be 
translated to a research or educational environment, or to any other environ-
ment in which a group of people decide to engage in innovating together.

You should think about innovating outside your 

core competency. Everything that supports that 

core competency today is a part with which to 

innovate.

At the beginning of the twenty-first century, some of the most successful 
venture funds began to move away from a sole concern with selecting invest-
ment  opportunities  and  incubating  ideas  and  toward  developing  internal 
processes to conceive and evolve ideas to create those opportunities them-
selves. This represents a significant shift in mind-set analogous to the one I 
propose in this book. It amounts to abandoning the notion that ideas are 
good and need only be “incubated” and instead presuming that initial ideas 
are just beginnings—hunches—and will have to evolve significantly before 
an opportunity can be conceived.

The principles of innovating as a process

Innovating is about finding a way to bring resources together to demonstrate 
a path to solving a real-world problem worth solving. The outcome of the 

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

313

process ought to be a road map to use resources for that purpose. If any new 
ideas emerge, it will happen along the way; at the outset, nothing needs to be 
new.

The objective of the process isn’t to accelerate, incubate, or dress up ideas. 
It is to evolve whatever initial hunch you have—probably beyond recogni-
tion—until a decision about resources can be made. This is the exact oppo-
site of how many so-called innovation labs are organized. Their process tends 
to involve thinking up a new idea, pulling together a slide deck and a busi-
ness case, and getting on the schedule of the committee that doles out fund-
ing. The committee compares and selects ideas, and someone begins to work 
on them. However, as noted in chapter 1, most of the ideas that eventually led 
to lauded innovations were, at the outset, neither new nor distinguishable 
from failed ideas. Rather, they evolved, which seems to imply that one should 
avoid selecting altogether and instead emphasize the need for the initial idea 
to evolve.

Innovating is a different process altogether. It is premised on the notion 
that, whatever the original idea, the sole certainty is that it will need to evolve. 
It will be easier to evolve it if the focus is placed on a problem. In chapter 6, I 
describe  some  of  the  principles  that  differentiate  innovating  from  merely 
culling ideas. They are: Innovating thrives when the exploration is open-ended 
rather than constrained in any way other than by defining an initial problem; 
the objective is to evolve and refine problems through the combination of 
accessible parts and people; ideas are neither good nor bad, and are not com-
parable;  ideas  are  inconsequential  as  an  end-product  for  a  process;  and 

Whatever your original idea, one thing is certain: It 

needs to evolve.

314 

CHAPTER 11

consequences emerge from translating resources into strategies to demon-
strate value.

A few other principles apply to innovating as a process.
•  You want ideas that help you extract the most value from every dollar 
spent. The precise dollar amount assigned as a budget is not infor mative. 
That is, you do not want to limit yourself to ideas that can be “shown” for, 
say, $1,000 or less.
•  Thriftiness ought to be implemented by how the process is run, not by an 
arbitrary budget number. Parts and easy procurement are most important.
•  The more people engaged in some way in the process to conceive the 
new idea, the broader the ownership of that idea. The process needs to en-
able many people to contribute in different roles. This means that the entire 
decision about an idea cannot be based solely on whether it accrued a team.
•  Senior  leadership  needs  to  own,  champion,  and  enact  the  process.  
Value emerges from sending a clear signal that the process is an important 
business unit.
•  The more people in an organization empowered to contribute insight, 
the better teams will learn how to use as a part everything the organization 
currently has or does.
•  The outcome of innovating isn’t an idea, but a series of choices to be 
made about a space of opportunity about which a decision can be made.

The endpoint of the innovating process is a decision  
(a verification recipe)

The decision to be made is about a specific space of opportunity and the re-
sources required to demonstrate it and seize it, as I describe in chapters 7 and 9.
By the time a group is ready to present the outcomes of its innovating to 
advance to the next scale, it should have coalesced as a team, have a proposal 

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

315

The decision to be made is about a specific  

space of opportunity and the resources required  

to demonstrate it and seize it.

to use resources, be able to articulate clear next steps that “de-risk” the op-
portunity, have a significant first milestone, and be able to make a tangible 
demonstration that hints at its future value and shows it is not only probable 
but doable. Otherwise, there is little upon which to base a decision.

Conversely, teams are ready to propose advancing to the next scale when 
they can articulate a problem that an organization can solve (and cares to 
solve). Specifically, teams ought to be able to:

•  outline an organization, demonstrating the salient aspects of that orga-
nization using their innovation prototype
•  identify the innovation that is needed, pointing to the specific aspects 
of their innovation prototype that will require a new approach (be it a 
new kind of gizmo or business model or social movement or whatever)
•  explain how an organization can be built up incrementally, through next 
steps, to address the problem, the resources that will be needed, the uncertain-
ties those resources will reduce, the space of opportunity that opens up, and 
the impact that ought to be expected from engaging in such an endeavor
•  describe risks and certainties, pointing to the innovation prototype.
The first milestone of the proposed “road map” is, in a way, the first veri-
fication recipe. Under the definition of a verification recipe given in chapter 
2, that milestone ought to make it possible to recognize a solution. That is, it 
ought to enable decision makers to assess whether the space of opportunity 
is  wrong  before  more  money  is  spent  on  subsequent  milestones.  Then  a 

316 

CHAPTER 11

straightforward decision can be based on that verification recipe: Do you 
care about the problem enough? Has the team given you reason to believe 
that the resources it requests are the best way to discover whether the idea 
has merit? Are those resources well employed to get that extra clarity regard-
ing the opportunity? Should the time of the team’s members be spent on this 
or would it better for them to focus exclusively on their regular jobs? Did the 
team manage to garner support? Most of these things can be ascertained 
through inspection of that first milestone. The dynamics of this decision 
process are not unlike those discussed in chapters 8 and 9.

In contrast with the idea-harvesting processes I discuss in chapter 6, here 
ideas self-select, and decision makers can analyze them individually on the 
merits of the plan of action proposed, not their relative appeal in comparison 
with other ideas. Instead of having thousands of ideas in need of “funneling,” 
asking originators to evolve ideas into decisions gives them an opportunity 
to work on ideas until they become plans or else drop them.

Overturning the typical way “innovators” in corporations seek and get 
approval  for  next  steps  diminishes  the  adversarial  relationships  that  are  a 
natural by-product of a “contest” in which alternative ideas are “pitched” to 
decision makers who hold the purse strings.

Seeding the process

Throughout  this  book,  I  have  hinted  at 
three options for initiating innovating as a 
process: as an open call seeded with a series 
of open-ended problems, with an innova-
tion prototyping kit, or by asking people to 
identify an interesting real-world problem. 
In  addition,  the  process  may  be  readily 
adapted  to  begin  with  new  technologies, 
perceived market needs, or any other input.

Select ideas 

on their 

own merits, 

not on their 

relative appeal 

compared to 

other ideas.

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

317

 At its conclusion, the process may lead to an innovation prototyping kit 
that can be seen as a form of documentation, to an innovation prototype ripe 
for advocacy, or to both.

A process, a workshop, or an innovating environment can begin with a 
space to work, parts, people, and a desire to work on something that can scale 
to the real world. Participants in the process, whatever their roles, ought to 
be interested in solving a real-world problem.

A process, a workshop, and, more generally, an 

innovating environment can begin with a space 

to work, parts, people, and a desire to work on 

something that can scale to the real world.

The sections that follow outline ways to engage people, work with parts, 
and induce a scale-up logic to accomplish the objectives discussed in the pre-
ceding sections. These suggestions emerge from my experience developing 
innovation programs internationally in university and corporate settings. In 
each implementation of this process I have carried out, I’ve always been able 
to identify elements in the culture of the organization that facilitated adapta-
tion to its specific context.

People

Innovation prototypes accrue people as they mature, and, as discussed in 
chapter 6, teams coalesce only when they begin to interact with parts and 
interface with other people. This means that from the outset your process 

318 

CHAPTER 11

needs to provide ways to engage people actively in multiple roles. At the very 
least, your process will need to reserve an active role for people who may 
encounter your team’s innovating through advisory or decision-making rela-
tionships, and it will need to allow for those people to come and go. 

You implement three kinds of active roles: team members, advisors, and 

decision-makers. 

The main considerations for forming teams around an idea are, first, that 
presumptive team members should be genuinely interested in the problem, 
possibly even having chosen it. Whether they know one another already and 
whether their backgrounds qualify them to participate are somewhat less im-
portant, in view of the discussion in chapters 3 and 4. Often, viewing the 
process as a way to advance in the organization is a good motivator.

Second,  creativity  need  not  be  an  attribute;  it  can  be  an  outcome. 
Whether people think of themselves as “creative” according to whatever dic-
tionary  definition  you  think  applies  doesn’t  matter.  Their  creativity  will 
emerge as they use their backgrounds, skills, and abilities to communicate 
with others to make a problem tangible.

Third,  having  people  from  different  disciplines  involved  helps  reduce 
disciplinary biases. Of all the benefits attributed to such groups, the only one 
I have observed and can take as a given is that they are much less likely than 
others to fall into the trap of using discipline-based jargon and standard as-
sumptions. The variation in their backgrounds is more likely to be an asset 
than a constraint. Members of a cross-disciplinary team working together 
have no choice but to learn from one another.

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

319

Coalescing People Around Projects

The project selection process is a carefully orchestrated sequence of events 
designed to group participants into teams that will later work on bigger 
problems  or  projects.  It  is  important  that  the  participants  select  the 
project they want to work on based on the problem, not on who else is in 
the group.

The selection process followed in the MIT innovation workshops is 
instructive and can be adapted to other settings. It is staged as a sequence 
of  exchanges  of  information  between  participants  about  the  larger 
projects.  (In  the  parlance  of  the  university,  these  are  called  Capstone 
Projects:  multifaceted  assignments  meant  to  serve  as  a  culminating 
experience in which students take what they’ve learned and apply it to 
examine a specific idea or create something specific.)

First, participants read some prepared real-world problem statements 
and discuss them briefly with whoever is sitting in the next chair. They 
address questions such as these: “Which technologies would you build?” 
“Who might care?” “Can you describe the problems in your own words?” 
Participants then identify their top three preferences among six to twelve 
problems presented. Next, assembled in groups, participants discuss how 
they  would  go  about  solving  the  problems.  This  same  discussion  then 
ensues in a second group based on second-choice preferences. Participants 
are then surveyed again for their top preferences.

The theory behind the process is to simulate an economic market for 
ideas,  and  the  way  it  is  staged  guarantees  an  information  exchange  in 
which  there  is  first  a  preference-diffusion  step  and  then  a  “near  miss” 
review. The full process spreads out the distribution of participants across 
projects. Through this process, teams are announced and given a bit of 
time to come together and discuss what they learned about the projects in 
the information-sharing rounds.

In this way, participants form an opinion about each project based on 
what they understand on their own and what they come to understand 
from others through conversation. When it comes time to share insights 
with their newly formed teams, participants think about the task at hand 
and what they have learned so far.

320 

CHAPTER 11

In  addition  to  having  a  process  to  craft  teams,  you  need  processes  to  

allow this team to evolve throughout their innovating.  

You’ll also want to include a role for advisors. You may think of advisors 
as mentors; for instance, having the leadership of different units participate 
in innovating as advisors is a way to set up a mechanism for early buy-in from 
the broader organization. But you may also think of everyone in your orga-
nization as a potential future advisor: The members of your organization 
have specific expertise and skills that may become valuable for the team’s in-
novating, and they too need to know that it is acceptable for them—and 
potentially rewarding as well—to share that expertise.   

Mentors

Mentors may come from inside or outside an organization. They may be 
managers, entrepreneurs, or technologists seasoned in the application of 
technology  to  industry.  Wherever  they  come  from,  they  must  be 
accustomed to providing feedback relevant to business impact much as a 
good member of a company’s advisory board would do. This extends to 
providing the same kind of feedback—not technical advice—even for a 
somewhat crude technical prototype. Mentors are going to see a lot of 
odd-looking contraptions that participants will present as prototypes to 
explain their innovating.

In addition to those criteria, mentors should never feel any obligation 

to become team members.

If the outcome of your innovating process is a decision, then sooner or 
later you’ll need to engage someone who cares about seeing the end results of 
your process. That is the role of decision-makers. You want decision-makers 
to be close to the process; that offers them an opportunity to engage sooner 
with  innovating  projects  as  advisors,  mentors,  or  through  intermediate 
checkpoints, placing less emphasis on “demo day.” When emphasis is placed 
on innovating and not on making a presentation, the conversation is about 
scale-up, not approval. 

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

321

Your efforts will probably benefit from having someone with some pow-
er and authority feeling ownership of the entire process—someone who can 
let everyone know that answering questions in the course of this process is 
considered part of their jobs. That’s how teams discover the parts in the cur-
rent  organization,  and  also  how  your  organization  can  use  innovating  to 
learn to communicate across its own silos.

Parts: the doer logic of the process

Innovating is predicated on doing as a way to learn by prototyping innova-
tions. As a doer, you care less about something looking pretty or about re-
ceiving approval. You care about it working. The concept of “being wrong” 
boils down to this: Something is wrong because it was put together wrongly 
or because it was put together for the wrong people. Something works when 
it stops being wrong. The only way to know you are wrong (or, by extension, 
that you are no longer wrong) is to be told by nature (“put together wrongly” 
so it doesn’t work, as above) or by people.

Parts  provide  tangibility  and  are  the  means  by  which  teams  become 
thrifty. However, anticipating every part any team might need can be cum-
bersome. Indeed, one of the jobs of a team is to identify as parts things you 
already do, produce, or procure. But for parts you don’t already own, there 
has to be a means of procuring them. Endowing a team with an arbitrary 
budget, say $1,000, emphasizes the budget, not thriftiness as a function of 
the process. You can as easily implement the constraint on thriftiness in the 
use of resources by introducing innocuous constraints: an overall time limit; 
a daily time limit for prototyping; and limits to what extra resources can be 
requested before producing a plan—not a budget, but a constraint that spec-
ifies what can be obtained with no further approval and what will require 
approval, which ought to be related directly to the demonstration value of 
the requested resource.

322 

CHAPTER 11

In my experience, this latter constraint translates into teams self-regulat-
ing and never spending more than a couple of thousand dollars. That, in 
turn, trains them to think in the same thrifty way when proposing next steps. 
In many organizations, the constraint turns out to be easier to implement if 
the organization already has a procurement function.

Scale

As your teams evolve the problems they work on, they will also evolve the 
level of sophistication with which they put together parts and people to 
achieve impact. This, by the way, is the very basis upon which you will be 
building the foundation for an innovating environment.

The doer logic continues. Participants will need new parts and new 
information  from  people  to  continue  prototyping  their  problems.  As 
they do so, and as they scale up, they will confront the need to reason 
about organization. The more clearly outlined the organization, the eas-
ier it is to define the problem it solves. It is a virtuous circle.

The problem the organization will solve lives at some scale. The cur-
rent  proof  of  concept  is  scale  0.  As  teams  get  closer  to  defining  what 
ought to be proven at scale 1, their prototypes ought to inform all that 
could  go  wrong  at  that  scale,  so  that  scale  1  informs  scale  2  and  each  
successive scale informs the next scale.

Eventually, as your arbitrary deadline approaches, teams will either 
be ready to produce a logical chain of possibility to advocate for more 
resources or will be ready to wrap up their projects in an innovation pro-
totyping kit that documents ways in which parts and people in your or-
ganization may be brought together differently to explore new spaces of 
opportunities. This can become the searchable basis for your innovating 
knowledge base, and the way in which your organization as a whole ap-
plies the guidelines for documenting I discuss for an individual in chapter 12.

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

323

The conductor: orchestrating and managing the process

Participants in the process will need lots of guidance. In some settings, there 
may be considerable pressure on those who’ve been selected to participate. 
They may experience some anxiety; after all, the corporation may still expect 
them all to continue to do their regular jobs. And they may be banking on 
the  process  turning  into  an  opportunity  for  long-term  personal  career 
growth. 

The purpose of guiding is to encourage participants to find their own 
answers (through technology or impact prototyping) and to help them make 
their questions and their assertions increasingly concrete.

I have already discussed how the outcomes of innovating may hint at dif-
ferent ways to repurpose what an organization currently does in order to 
seize different spaces of opportunity. Just as people learn, so too does the 
organization.

For the people engaged in the process, learning is, in fact, the overall ob-
jective. Participants should learn how to prototype and scale up a problem 
again and again, and in doing so learn about the organization and about 
where to address questions.

The learning objectives—ones that will pay dividends in the wider in-
novating environment being established—are reinforced by guiding partici-
pants to adopt a can-do attitude, take ownership of their learning, and em-
brace the opportunity to make decisions in the face of uncertainty.

At some point, participants will have to go back to their regular jobs. 
Before that, though, the projects they work on need either to end or be advo-
cated to continue, at which time projects need to deliver something tangible, 
thorough, and rigorously inspiring. In my workshop in the educational set-
ting, these manifest, respectively, as the following:

•  a prototype, a physical illustration, or a mockup of the proposed tech-
nology solution or a precise demonstration of the problem (tangible),
•  a brief written report (thorough), and

324 

CHAPTER 11

•  a brief presentation to an appropriate audience from outside the work-
shop (rigorously inspiring).
The specific elements of these final deliverables lay the foundation for 
how innovation prototyping will take place in your innovating environment. 
They may constitute the basis for documentation and possibly a searchable 
innovating intelligence. 

For each project, the teams that propose to continue would have to pre-

pare to walk into movement 2 of the imaginary ballet in chapter 8.

I brought together for these presentations an audience of members of the 
MIT ecosystem who agreed to act as a “council of wisepersons.” I included 
academics, administrators, investors, and entrepreneurs.

In an academic setting, a presentation event is a typical way to reenact 
movements 2 and 3 of the imaginary ballet. In a corporate setting, the correct 
way to reenact the same movements is to create a meeting with actual deci-
sion makers; no role-playing is needed. If they find an interesting avenue to 
pursue,  they  will  become  the  equivalent  of  members  of  the  board  of  a 
startup.

As I discuss in chapter 6, the concepts for innovating just outlined for a 
corporation  apply  as  well  to  research  organizations—and  obviously  the 
workshop concept fits other educational settings.

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

325

Takeaways

•  You can create the conditions for innovating anywhere and make it a con-
tinuous process. Innovating is about finding a way to bring resources togeth-
er to demonstrate a path to solving a real-world problem. Innovation is the 
afterthought. 
•  You can build an engine for innovating that yields impact, strategic insight 
into new problems, and increased efficiency; “configure” it to produce new 
products, companies, causes, policies, inventions, innovation kits, identify 
talent and resources, or develop professional innovators. 

In a corporation, it can be a unit tasked with finding ways to reuse every-
thing to solve a new problem before what you do becomes obsolete. 
In research/academic organizations, it can make research inclusive of other 
disciplines and propagate it all the way to society.
Generally, it can drive the conversation towards making societal problems 
tangible and solvable.

•  Whether  refining  your  organization’s  offering  or  planning  its  obsoles-
cence, your organization can be an innovation prototype. That is your in-
novating advantage.

•  Your innovating advantage comes from these principles:

Innovations begin open-ended and emerge from exploring a problem. 

You may venture beyond your core competency. In hindsight you’ll always 
be able to rationalize how your innovation evolved logically from it.

At the outset, “Ideas” hardly look new or different from failed ideas. “Ideas” 
are inconsequential. Your objective isn’t to accelerate, incubate, or dress up 
ideas for show. It is to evolve them beyond recognition, until a decision 

326 

CHAPTER 11

about resources can be made or time runs out. That’s easier done if the fo-
cus is on the problem.

Your  innovating  process  reveals  how  to  access  parts  and  people  in  an 
organization.

Everything you’ve already built, know, and have can be a part.

Everyone in an organization can contribute as innovator, mentor, or ex-
pert. The more contributors, the broader the ownership, the greater lever-
aging of existing capabilities. 

Arbitrary budgets for ideas are confusing. Resolve to extract the most from 
every dollar spent instead of limiting yourself to ideas that can be “shown 
and told” for, say, $1,000.

The outcome is a scale-up sequence of choices to allocate resources to ob-
tain answers about a space of opportunity. 

Innovations, if any, emerge in the scale-up. At the outset, nothing needs to  
be new.

 

MANAGING INNOVATING CONTINUOUSLY 

327

     12
12

the world is your lab, so you 
need a notebook to converse 

with yourself     

Get it out of your brain before the memory of an idea you once had becomes 
more important than the idea ever was. Later, when your brain finds it again, 
it will become a near miss. That and everything it helps your brain remember 
can be a part.

It took only a madeleine for Marcel Proust to remember his childhood.
Might this imply that you may dispense with your note-taking software 
if you make a point of bringing a new muffin to every meeting? That may be 
stretching what Proust describes, but it helps bring up a whole bunch of im-
portant questions: What’s the best way to keep a record of my innovating? 
What is the purpose of those records? Are they for me? Someone else? Pos-
terity? Are they just a defensive weapon in case of litigation? Am I creating a 
journal? A manual? Do I need a hunch to start? Can documentation help me 
arrive at a hunch? What am I even supposed to write down?!

There are various theories about how our brains might work and what 
they imply about the best ways to remember and relate different pieces of 
information. Some say we should document everything we do, but it’s un-
clear  which  approach  to  documentation  to  take.  Perhaps  writing  things 
down in a notebook by hand is best. Maybe it’s best to use some kind of digi-
tal device. There may be some other way that works best for you. And then 
there’s the question of whether you should carry your notebook with you at 
all times, or if it’s ever okay to leave your digital device behind.

Perhaps we should just follow Proust’s lead and eat more muffins.
One way to answer these questions is to focus on the benefits of docu-

mentation. Some of them are easily understood in hindsight.

Consider the day your repeat innovating has led you to become insanely 
famous. Your sketches and prototypes may now be able to fetch unfathom-
able amounts of money at auction—for you or perhaps for your descendants. 
They may be displayed in museums, as have Picasso’s sketches on napkins, 
John Lennon’s glasses, Leonardo da Vinci’s notebooks, and even the Apple I. 
Collectors value the ephemera generated by innovators.

You may even derive value sooner if ownership over your work is chal-
lenged in court and you have to show your records to support a patent or 
some other piece of intellectual property.

Perhaps documentation will provide you solace when it facilitates the 
reunion with an idea you thought lost. In theory, after all, the idea has been 
documented.

The benefits of documentation will be most easily 

understood by future-you—the real expert at what 
you are doing and fully equipped with hindsight.

332 

CHAPTER 12

This all implies noteworthy documentation that is systematic and search-
able. It also implies that you ought to go about documenting diligently. It 
says little about what to write down or sketch, and it provides nothing in the 
way of how to derive value from your documentation now.

Personally, in the context of innovation prototyping, I am torn. It is not 
clear whether having notes and records about everything you do, observe, 
and hear is, in and of itself, help or hindrance. Notwithstanding all the ben-
efits I’ve just described of keeping detailed records and proper documenta-
tion and making it all easily accessible, is it possible that documenting every-
thing could get in the way of just thinking about things? Or is there a way for 
what, when, and how you record to help you take advantage of your brain’s 
evolutionary adaptation to relate distinct pieces of information?

How do you derive benefit from documentation when you have nothing 
but a hunch to go on? Or even before your hunch becomes apparent? And 
when, what, or how much you should document is unclear?

The answer is to dispense with the notion that documentation is mere 
record keeping and instead see it as a part. Like other parts, it does little for 
you when stored away. Instead, approach it mechanically. It is a way to cap-
ture things you need to be alert to, and a way to help you take part in the 
“conversation” that is your innovating. You can derive value from documen-
tation  in  much  the  same  way  Proust  discovered  his  childhood  in  a 
madeleine.

In chapters 3, 4, 5, and 6, I discuss how to converse with parts, people, 
and a team. In chapter 7, I discuss how to converse with your problem through 
questions. In chapter 8, I discuss how to use your innovation prototype to 
converse with others about the problem. In chapter 9, I discuss how to trade 
off certainties and risk through conversation. This chapter is about how to 
take advantage of documentation as a means to be part of the larger conver-
sation your innovating has become, in the way Proust’s madeleine provoked 
involuntary memory. Beyond a record of to-do lists and results of experi-
ments, documentation is a way to tap into that involuntary memory as well 
as other features of your brain.

 

THE WORLD IS YOUR LAB 

333

Long-Term Benefits of Documentation

Some long-term benefits of documentation derive from the simple notion 
of  storage  and  access.  Keeping  records  is  a  way  to  capture  important, 
specific details about things you try and more formal experiments. Those 
records can help with writing or defending intellectual property (IP) and, 
most important, reducing IP to practice. Careful records are a source of 
credibility in a dispute.

The  world  you  aspire  to  affect  surrounds  you.  That  world  is  your 
laboratory. Documenting can be as simple as maintaining a laboratory/
engineering notebook—an innovating notebook. The notebook is where 
an experiment first comes to live. It is the first place in which it becomes 
tangible. You write and sketch in it to make your reasoning and what you 
anticipate will happen clear to yourself—you “front load” your thinking. 
The notebook is also where you record what happened, what surprised 
you, and how it was all wrong. Future-you—the real expert at what you 
are doing, fully equipped with hindsight—will know how to make that 
useful. Innovation is the afterthought.

Because the world is your lab, you do not get the luxury of always being 
able to set up an experiment. You should still strive to make notes of what 
you observe as if it were an experiment you set up—if for no other reason, 
so you can offload the memory and focus on thinking about how to bring 
parts together to incorporate it into your innovation prototype at scale. 
Your innovation prototype is the world at scale—or at least a version of it 
in which the problem cannot exist.

Annotating  everything  about  an  innovation  prototype  has  another 
long-term benefit: It allows you to dismantle your innovation prototype 
and repurpose its parts for use at your next scale. It also facilitates going 
back  to  earlier  designs  or  rescuing  earlier  thoughts.  The  notebook  in 
which those thoughts live is your madeleine, a time machine. It helps you 
converse and correct past-you; browsing it allows past you to surprise you 
with thoughts you may not remember having and from which you derive 
insights—just as you derive insights from interfacing with other people. 
  As an innovator, you are a human with a constantly evolving innovation 
prototype. Your job is to choreograph parts and people and scale. The 
notebook is the story of all of the near misses of past you. Everything in it 
can be a part.

334 

CHAPTER 12

To derive benefit from documentation when you 

have only a hunch, you must dispense with the 

notion that documentation is just record keeping 

and see it as a part.

Involuntary memory

In addition to the wealth of information we acquire through our disciplinary 
training and whatever we record in our notes, our brains also store memory 
from all our senses and mechanical movements. Sometimes our brains make 
connections that would seem absurd to others but make perfect sense to us. 
These connections emerge from a collage of experiences unencumbered by 
the disciplinary boundaries we may have been trained to respect.

This sort of brain activity is just like drawing the seemingly preposterous 
connections I ask you in other chapters to be unafraid of making. It is also 
the terrain upon which you can search for hunches in your experience and in 
the experience of others. Your brain works the same way regardless of wheth-
er you already have a hunch.

Some people use the word “intuition” to describe this phenomenon. I 
avoid that word for two reasons. One is that intuition is difficult, if not im-
possible, to practice. The other is that, like “innovation” or “creativity,” the 
word “intuition” describes something after the fact. “Intuition” is what we 
call it when there seems to be no rational explanation for how we came up 
with a good idea. I wonder how, in that context, it means anything other 
than “I made it up.”

 

THE WORLD IS YOUR LAB 

335

Speakers of Romance languages will appreciate that there is no real dif-
ference between “making something up” and “inventing”; for instance, in 
Catalan, in French, in Italian, and in Spanish the same word is used for 
both.

The more you just let things brew in your brain, the more likely you are 
to have a hunch—which is, fundamentally, an intuition. If you don’t yet 
have a hunch, that is how you may happen upon one.

If you are willing to accept that documenting is a way to become part 
of the conversation, and you accept that that may be the sole purpose for 
documentation today, what you need to document becomes clearer. You 
need to explain to yourself the things you make up. In keeping with one of 
this book’s central themes, you also need to explain to yourself how you 
think they are wrong, or why they resist being wrong.

To ensure your documentation remains useful in the future, you just 
need to make sure you are diligent about keeping notes, you add dates, and 
you keep some sort of index.

To ensure they are useful now, whether or not you have a hunch, your 
notes need to help present-you and future-you continue to “make stuff up” 
easily. Think of them as a laboratory journal, with your laboratory defined 
as  everything  that  surrounds  you,  and  concern  yourself  with  recording 
your insights, observations, and reactions. The value of what you record 
will be apparent only in hindsight. Unless you are already famous or you 
have a court case pending, the value of what you document will mostly 
emerge from what the notes help you think about and the kind of brain 
activity they trigger. That requires that you make it a point to engage ac-
tively  with  your  notes.  The  particular  madeleine  is  as  the  circumstances 
around which you ate it.

This brings us back to the question of how to make the best use of 
documentation so it allows you to make stuff up easily. In my experience, 
the  process  begins  with  making  the  most  of  your  brain.  Let  me  explain 
with an example from the field of artificial intelligence (AI).

For years, researchers in AI and neuroscience have tried to reproduce 
human  intelligence.  The  same  challenge  emerges  again  and  again:  Our 

336 

CHAPTER 12

brains integrate all kinds of stimuli, memories, and language in ways that 
defy simple models. Our brains record information in peculiar ways that 
go beyond tags, files, folders, and so on. We may remember something by 
smell, with a motion, or through visual stimuli. Cause and effect seem to be 
tricky in our brains, too. When presented with the same two phenomena 
repeatedly,  our  brains  will  adapt  to  anticipate  one  or  the  other—as  did  
Pavlov’s dogs.

To operationalize these observations, there ought to be a way for us to 
condition ourselves to recognize patterns, unearth memories, or connect 
seemingly disparate concepts with ease. For instance, a memory might be 
triggered involuntarily by your writing something in a way similar to how
you once wrote something else, or by your laying something out in a way 
that is similar to something you laid out previously. In both cases, of course, 
you have to have done the earlier “something”—which is where the prac-
tice of “documenting” might be beneficial.

It may well be that the act of reflecting on something and writing it 
down in a sensory-rich environment is all you need for your brain to begin 
developing the kinds of connections of parts and people with which you 
can continue innovating.

The more you make a point of recording your thoughts, even when on 
the  go,  the  more  you  broaden  the  expanse  of  sensory  information  your 
brain might use to “annotate” your thinking. This is where the idea of con-
versing with yourself comes in: Documenting done as I’ve described it acti-
vates all those areas of your brain that truly come together only when you 
engage in a conversation with yourself.

In  other  words,  you  have  to  demand  more  from  writing  something 

down than just storing and indexing notes. 

 

THE WORLD IS YOUR LAB 

337

How Our Documenting Brains Work

I am asking you to take for granted that your brain is at its best when it 
forces itself to build a story that connects distinct and dissimilar pieces of 
information and memories. Whatever you store is but a means of priming 
that  brain  function  when  future  you  browses  what  you  wrote  and 
encounters an idea again.

You  may  need  to  find  a  compromise  between  the  searchability  of 
digital notes and the tangibility of “analog” notebooks. Today’s digital 
documentation  and  collaboration  tools  and  cameras  are  optimized  for 
the purpose of search and storage. When innovating, your objective is to 
make everything as tangible as possible.

Thoughts that can be searched are not together until you put them 
together  somewhere—wherever  browsing  could  lead  to  a  chance  en-
counter with something in your documentation that spurs the conversation 
with yourself.

In labs, you would be asked to make extensive use of copy/paste or even 
printing and gluing to make sure all thoughts that belong together appear 
in one place.

After  you  start  to  bring  things  together  in  one  place,  it  is  easier  to 
understand what systematizing means: it is all about bringing closer the 
thoughts that must come together for a certain purpose so that it takes 
less browsing or searching to get to all the relevant thoughts.

What you should capture in your documentation

I’ve offered lots of motivation and encouragement for documenting, and a 
rationale for doing so. But that still leaves the question of what to include in 
your documentation. In my experience, an unassuming approach works best. 
Some of my suggestions are general; others are more specifically linked to 
things you’ll do along the innovation prototyping path. Some documenta-
tion is of what you learn and do; sometimes the act of documenting provokes 
thought.

338 

CHAPTER 12

First, you should capture whatever you are thinking, without concern for 
being wrong. In the future, in hindsight, you will understand what you meant 
and why you were wrong—if you were.

When you write down a fact, also capture what it would imply for that 
fact to go away. Write about how you would know whether something can 
make that fact go away. Imagine not one but as many solutions as you can 
that would make the fact no longer a fact. Write those down.

You are going to be making it a routine to recombine and replace parts 
and insights and then imagine the larger reality they now represent while 
trying to find out how it will not work. Those are trial and error. Describe 
each trial and each error unconcerned about whether you could have pre-
dicted an error before trying. Capture in your documentation the trials of 
others you may observe. Write down every contradiction and paradox that 
emerges as you are innovating.

State, restate, and restate again the problem that gives you purpose. Write 
it down often. My own rule for this is to do so in fewer than 300 words each 
time. It does not matter whether what you write down today matches the 
way you stated the problem yesterday.

Each  time  you  restate  the  problem  in  your  documentation,  consider 
writing down your answers to questions such as these: Is this even a problem? 
Is there a related, more accessible problem? Can I draw it? Diagram it? Enact 
it? Can I enumerate data? Unknowns? Conditions? How can I demonstrate 
the problem with what I have? Can I describe it with parts and people?

Capture your thoughts without regard for being 

wrong. Our brains have no problem drawing the 

seemingly preposterous connections that fuel 

innovating.

 

THE WORLD IS YOUR LAB 

339

When you write about parts, remember that they 

are important only because of what they do.

When you write about parts, remember that they are important only be-
cause of what they do. So, for each aspect of the problem you want to solve, 
capture in your documentation an explanation of what you want each part to 
do. Use analogies if that helps; they’ll get you to a near miss. Describe how to 
make the part work for your purpose. Document how much it cost. Write 
down what you want it to represent. And for each part, write down how you 
answered this question: Can I do this with some other part?

What you already know is an asset, not a constraint. Capture what you 
don’t know; go find someone or some resource that teaches you how to do it, 
and write that person’s name and contact information down, or spell out 
what the resource is and how you might get it. If you think something is im-
possible,  it  should  still  be  in  your  documentation.  Write  it  down.  Who 
knows? Future you may find in you that elderly scientist in Arthur C. Clarke’s 
laws of prediction.

Keep a record of every question you think of for which you’ll need to 
find an answer, even if you don’t need that answer today. Document every 
assumption you make; they are important elements of your evolving “ques-
tionnaire.” I caution you about questionnaires in chapter 4. Here I offer them 
as  a  tool  in  your  documentation:  They  summarize  your  questions  in  one 
place. You develop and use them in your conversations with people but you 
never show them; they are not survey instruments. Humans notoriously have 
trouble expressing themselves in questionnaires.

You’re going to be meeting a lot of people with different backgrounds, 
information, capabilities, and skills. Write about that. Everyone is an expert 

340 

CHAPTER 12

at something, so find out at what and capture that in your notes. Make a note 
of the circumstances under which you should contact a person again.

When you write about people, be sure to capture the mundane details: 
who, where, when. Don’t forget to write down how each person thinks you 
are  wrong,  the  potential  contacts  they  mention,  and  the  facts  they  share. 
That is the conversation you had and should capture. Whatever insights you 
may derive after the conversation belong in a separate place in your notes. 
That avoids conflating your own thoughts with the conversation you actu-
ally had; why you derived this or that insight after any given conversation is 
a mystery and immaterial. It also keeps your own ideas separate from the 
people who might have sparked your thinking.

Before  and  after  meeting  people,  review  your  “hidden”  questionnaire. 
Did any new questions emerge? Write them down to use the next time. Were 
any questions solved? Write down how. Are there assumptions to revisit? 
Articulate how and why, and adjust the questionnaire accordingly.

As you innovate, you’ll build an organization—a machine made up of 
people and parts. It will need management and it will need technology. Be-
fore that, though, you have to find a way reduce everything about it to every-
day words. Write it down. Write down how its parts will interface with one 
another, and what can and cannot be systematized. Describe the basic orga-
nizing principles. I find it helps to force myself to replace every piece of jar-
gon I might be tempted to use with something I could explain to a friend 
who is an expert at something else.

When you skim through your notes, think of everything you read as a 
near miss. Are there ways to make the near misses related? Could you some-
how try several of those near misses together and find out how they are wrong?

Write about the conversations you have with 

people. Capture your own insights separately.

 

THE WORLD IS YOUR LAB 

341

When you skim through your notes, think of 

everything you read as a near miss.

This is not an exhaustive list. 
As you are innovating and documenting becomes a regular activity, your 
own list will grow. You may also want to get a second copy of this book and 
annotate in it why you think each and every thing I say is wrong. That way, 
you can grow your own list. I confess this is a shameless attempt to win a bet 
on how many copies this book will sell.

The “Beginning to Annotate” box has some tips for getting you started.

Beginning to Annotate

There are ways to prompt annotation. Some of these take the form of 
questions or the form of incomplete statements to be filled in. Here are 
some examples:

•  How is that even a problem?
•  What if …?
•  If that were true, then ________.
•  Now that I know how to make this work, what happens if I 
change ________?
•  This has got to be wrong, but why? What would make it wrong?
•  What that person said cannot be true. If it were, ________.

342 

CHAPTER 12

Innovating, in hindsight

What I mean by documenting is nothing other than writing down or sketch-
ing out what results from applying the principles, asking the questions, and 
recording the observations I have written about in the other chapters. Your 
future documentation is your laboratory notebook, and your lab is the world 
in which you intend to solve a problem.

Throughout the book I have adopted an unassuming vantage point that 
may seem contrarian at times. The romantic appeal of appearing to be a con-
trarian notwithstanding, the fact is that the nonlinear character of innova-
tion makes it difficult to find meaning in words that will serve to describe 
accurately a future larger reality when you are still at a stage at which nothing 
is supposed to be working.

What was the value proposition of that first laser again? The one done as 
a side project, with a flash lamp and a material—ruby—that countless ex-
perts had discarded as a poor fit to build lasers?

The unassuming vantage point helped you venture 

into the impossible. Retelling yourself your story in 

hindsight helps you systematize value.

But still, there is value to the story of your innovating in hindsight. It 
does make sense. And retelling it the way you understand it now is as impor-
tant to your systematizing and to your documenting as taking the unassum-
ing  vantage  point  was  for  venturing  into  the  impossible.  That’s  how  you 
eventually learn. In fact, your story in hindsight will look a lot like a recipe—
one someone might follow to get to your “innovation” more efficiently, even 

 

THE WORLD IS YOUR LAB 

343

though that recipe may have nothing to do with what you actually did when 
you were innovating. Let me show you, using this book as an example. The 
story I have told you about in this book reads like this, working backward, in 
hindsight:

Get it out of your brain before the memory of an idea you once had becomes 
more  important  than  the  idea  ever  was.  Innovating—bringing  together 
parts, people, and scale in a way that no one has done before—is something 
you do continually. Organizations don’t just grow on their own. You build 
them. Watering isn’t enough. You may take the extreme position that you’ll 
end  up  building  multiple  organizations  each  on  top  of  the  previous  one. 
Once you build the next organization, you’ll reuse parts from the old one 
and you’ll get to implement everything you learned on the previous one to 
do things more simply the next time around.
 
Together, the actions you propose taking next, the logical chain of pos-
sibility, and the unknowns that remain suggest a learning progression. It may 
seem that taking the scale of your innovating up a notch is the only path left 
on which to make progress. You don’t really know whether that’s true. But 
there’s only one way to find out: Approach people who have the resources 
you need and propose that they join you.

At some point the elderly scientist from Arthur C. Clarke’s first law  
of  prediction  will  concede  that  you’ve  conjured  your  way  around  the   
“impossible.”

This is all taken verbatim from the beginnings of the chapters in part III, 
starting with this chapter and working backward. The other chapters do not 
matter in hindsight because the “beginnings of an innovation are a mismatch 
for the stories of the organizations and innovations they ultimately empower” 
(from chapter 1) and because, like the stories in chapter 1, yours will “appear 
to be fraught with near misses and learning” that make everything look like 
an anecdote. What matters is that “an innovation came to [everyone’s] atten-
tion because it had an impact. Specifically, [you] solved a real-world prob-
lem” (from chapter 2).

344 

CHAPTER 12

Documentation can be your first innovation prototype. Writing down a 

seemingly preposterous idea can get you started innovating.

 

THE WORLD IS YOUR LAB 

345

you can now start. This is loop 2.

innovation emerges in the recurrence.

If  your  innovation  prototype  exists  already,  this  is  how  you 
start again. Go to chapter 1 with a larger problem to materialize. 
The parts are different, the people change, and the accuracy of the 
conversations you have with them change at the new scale at which 
you address the problem. What you do stays the same.

Nothing changes except scale. Innovating stays the same. Your 

 

YOUR TURN 

349

epilogue: academic commentary

Innovating is a discipline and practice in its own right that benefits from 
many healthy connections to several other disciplines, much as physics and 
engineering relate to each other and much as behavioral science relates to 
economics and management.

This book brings together ideas from several disciplines to explain in-
novating by its actions. In this commentary, you will find academic refer-
ences  and  relevant  literature  across  several  disciplines.  Some  support  key 
ideas discussed in the book or portray the opposing ideas; others help to situ-
ate the book’s content in a broader discussion. 

To use the language I have introduced in this book: This book can be 
considered a fully working prototype of a conceptual and cross-disciplinary 
rendering of the subject of innovating. The concepts discussed in this aca-
demic commentary are the parts with which I have built this prototype.

Bounded rationality and behavioral decision making

Throughout this book, I outline a systematic process and illustrate its roots 
in logic, but because the focus is on “doing” I omit references to cognitive 
traps and to the implications in decision making. However, the presentation 
of skills and capabilities is consistent with and at times inspired by Daniel 

Kahneman’s pioneering work on behavioral decision making, which builds 
on the concept of bounded rationality, and by subsequent work on cognitive 
traps. That is, the presentation of the methodology is logical, but I have tak-
en care not to imply that the decision making that follows can be executed by 
following a similarly logical, formulaic, or Über-rational approach. On the 
contrary, I often allude to the dangers of overly prescriptive recipes and to 
the need to broaden the space of opportunity rather than rushing to make 
choices.

The book incorporates strategies for avoiding cognitive traps in a subtle 
way. For instance, the presentation of innovating as combining prototyping 
of an entire innovation with reasoning about how the problem is wrong is 
consistent with strategies for avoiding availability and confirmation bias pre-
sented by Kahneman and others. Because the book is intended not to show 
how to avoid such biases in decision making but rather to help innovators 
accrue skills and capabilities for innovating, I chose to introduce the con-
cepts through an analogy with Arthur C. Clarke’s laws of prediction and to 
not expand on the nature of those biases in the text, preferring instead to 
offer some suggested readings here.

Readings
Bazerman, Max H., and Don A. Moore.  Judgment in Managerial Decision 
Making, seventh edition. Wiley, 2008.

Kahneman, Daniel. “Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for behav-
ioral economics.” American Economic Review 93, no. 5 (2003): 1449–1475.

Kahneman,  Daniel.  “A  perspective  on  judgment  and  choice:  Mapping 
bounded rationality.” American Psychologist 58, no. 9 (2003): 697–720.
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2011.

354 

EPILOGUE

Bridging with artificial intelligence

This book’s use of methods and strategies from artificial intelligence (AI) as 
a sort of “micro-foundation” provides some protection from the biases that 
emerge from the literature on bounded rationality and its effects on decision 
making.

Artificial intelligence has, for several years, operated at the boundary of 
logical  rationality  and  empirically  observable  human  rationality,  with  the 
objective of reproducing the latter. The Turing test is an early example of the 
challenges associated with operating at that boundary..

Indeed, the most mathematical branch of AI has sought to equip itself 
with myriad tools for fighting biases empirically. In computational learning, 
these biases account for what is known as overfitting and/or confusion of 
correlation and causation.

Artificial intelligence has also sought to create computational ways to 
acquire knowledge by making sense of empirical observations, with or with-
out preexisting models. In a way, AI has created a logic that runs parallel to 
the empirical biases documented in the literature on bounded rationality, 
not because it claims to solve them but because it is concerned with the tools 
that help develop evidence from observables as a search problem.

The interested reader may want to draw connections between the meth-
ods outlined in this book and the logical basis outlined by Patrick Henry 
Winston and by Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig for knowledge representa-
tion, forward–backward logic, null space, near misses, and so on.

Using the logical tools of artificial intelligence to formulate the problem 
of innovation provides the micro-foundation I believe innovation needs to 
bridge in and out of the “black box” often alluded to by economists (see 
“Learning and innovating” and “No thing is new” in this epilogue). 

  

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

355

Readings
Mitchell, Tom M. “Generalization as search.” Artificial intelligence 18, no. 2 
(1982): 203–222.

Pearl,  Judea.  Causality:  Models,  Reasoning,  and  Inference,  second  edition. 
Cambridge University Press, 2009.

Pearl, Judea. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plau-
sible Inference. Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

Poggio,  Tomaso,  and  Federico  Girosi.  “Networks  for  approximation  and 
learning.” Proceedings of the IEEE 78, no. 9 (1990): 1481–1947.
Russell,  Stuart  J.,  and  Peter  Norvig.  Artificial  Intelligence:  A  Modern  Ap-
proach. Prentice-Hall, 1995.
Turing, Alan M. “Computing machinery and intelligence,” Mind 59, no. 236 
(1950): 433–460.

Winston,  Patrick  Henry.  Artificial  Intelligence,  second  edition.  Addison-
Wesley, 1984.

Winston, Patrick Henry. “Learning and reasoning by analogy.” Communica-
tions of the ACM 23, no. 12 (1980): 689–703. A version with details is avail-
able as “Learning and Reasoning by Analogy: the Details” (Memo 520, MIT 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, April 1979).

Winston, Patrick Henry. “Learning new principles from precedents and ex-
ercises.” Artificial Intelligence 19, no. 3 (1982): 321–350. For a more detailed 
version, see Learning New Principles from Precedent Details, MIT Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory Memo No. 632, May 1981.

Winston, Patrick Henry. Learning Structural Descriptions from Examples. 
PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1970. A shortened ver-
sion  can  be  found  in  The  Psychology  of  Computer  Vision,  ed.  P.  Winston  
(McGraw-Hill, 1975).

356 

EPILOGUE

Iterations and the induction argument

The arguments presented in chapter 2 conceal a formal definition of itera-
tion and an induction argument. These and the precise definition of “prob-
lem” I introduce borrow from definitions in theory of computation.

The formal induction and iteration in chapter 2 permit a definition of 
learning as a sum of skills that may be practiced (each of the actions in the 
iteration) and as an evolution toward an increasingly clear problem (the out-
come of each iteration). The iteration is formally defined because it ends 
with the exact same structure that serves as an input to the next iteration—
namely a problem statement following our three arguments. Nothing pre-
vents the reader from arriving at multiple new problem statements, however; 
as a matter of fact, that is a common output from the process. These two 
characteristics differentiate the recurrence proposed in chapter 2 from other 
approaches that have been taken to associate iterating with innovation.

The  induction  argument  concealed  in  chapter  2  is  important  to  help 
readers understand that, although the endpoint may not be in sight, and al-
though there are no guarantees of converging on a solution before they give 
up, what they are working on has the same structure as the endpoint, and the 
process they are following will not distract their attention—that is, if they 
indeed find a problem worth solving through innovation, it will become ap-
parent through the very same steps they are using to discover it.

The  complete  induction  argument  goes  as  follows:  You  can  verify  by 
yourself that the following three conditions are indeed true at the end and 
persuade yourself by induction that you are best served by working on your 
hunch to make them apparent also at the outset:

Endpoint. The day an innovation is recognized, members of a commu-
nity will be using the outcome of your innovating to address a need that 
was until then unmet and most likely also either unknown to them or 
elusive. That need, no matter how big or small, reflects something the 
members of a community would like to accomplish but cannot. That is 
the  problem.  Their  adoption  of  your  innovation  for  a  given  purpose 

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

357

implies the recognition of the existence of the problem, and their deriv-
ing a measurable benefit from it implies that your innovation does in-
deed solve the problem (decidable). Your delivering this innovation sus-
tainably implies trivially the existence of a solution. This is all true the 
day your innovation is recognized as such: A real-world problem exists, 
though it might have been elusive at first; by using your solution, the 
members of a community verify that your innovation is indeed a solu-
tion; and your innovation renders both the problem and the solution 
tangible.
Step before endpoint. Look at the very last iteration of your organization 
or artifact before its adoption by its community. The things you can ac-
tually do are: bring parts together in a different way, develop aspects of 
your organization (which is another way to bring parts together in a dif-
ferent way), or attract new people and skills. The result of your actions 
may lead to a refined understanding of the problem, but the problem it-
self did not change—which means that at that time, you had to be able to 
describe the problem by means of your candidate solution, what the solu-
tion had to achieve, and your best guess as to how others would appreci-
ate that your candidate solution solved the problem. So, in your last it-
eration, you must have had answers for all three conditions as well.
Formal induction. Because at each iteration what you do is to operate 
with parts, the organization, and interact with people, the above reason-
ing applies throughout all the steps of the iteration all the way to the 
beginning. 
Some readers may find this formal induction a bit too formal; after all, 
the steps are not mathematical per se, and thus while the argument follows a 
clear mathematical logic it is really a logically structured guess.

Although the actions in the iteration I propose follow from combining 
George Pólya’s approach with a more general and formal definition of the 
problem and from notions emerging from theory of computation and the 
definition  of  problem  therein,  the  iteration  that  results  has  elements  in 

358 

EPILOGUE

common with other methodologies that were developed for different pur-
poses: W. Edwards Deming’s Plan-Do-Check-Act circle and all the subse-
quent evolution of ideas refining in TQM and 6Sigma. All methodologies 
share a call to action and refinement through verification of some measure of 
quality. The most salient difference is the object of that quality: Deming’s 
Plan-Do-Check-Act and subsequent evolutions of the method emphasize 
procedural quality, whereas in this book I look at learning as the measure of 
quality. As an innovation prototype scales up and learning becomes more 
specialized,  I  suspect  the  similarities  between  both  approaches  may 
increase.

Readings
Deming, W. Edwards. Out of the Crisis. Center for Advanced Engineering 
Study, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1986.

Morrow,  David  R.,  and  Anthony  Weston.  A  Workbook  for  Arguments:  A 
Complete Course in Critical Thinking. Hackett, 2015.
Pzydek, Thomas, and Paul Keller. The Six Sigma Handbook, fourth edition. 
McGraw-Hill, 2014.

Sipser, Michael. Introduction to the Theory of Computation, second edition. 
Course Technology, 2006.

Kits, DIY, and experimentation

The use of kits is widespread as an educational tool to help anyone under-
stand  basic  scientific  principles,  and—in  self-reliant  communities  such  as 
Do-It-Yourself communities—to offer hobbyists an opportunity to self-as-
semble certain products. In an article for Make, Michael Schrage provides an 
overview of the long history of kits used by experimenters. Whether for hob-
byists or education, the end goal is clear and well documented in the instruc-
tions that accompany such kits.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

359

In this book, I propose a new consideration of how kits can be used: 
bringing the familiar aspects of kits to the domain of translational research 
and  innovation  education,  where  the  road  map  to  impact  is  open-ended. 
This capitalizes on the surging trend in providing resources for individuals 
and organizations to become technology and knowledge self-reliant: do-it-
yourself and maker movements (see, for instance, make:magazine at make-
zine.com) and its foreseeable relevance in academic research and education; 
the hackerspace movement; learning science at home with educational kits; 
and learning on your own through open-source platforms. These movements 
are often confused with open innovation or open science and similar princi-
pled approaches to aggregate the creative but “faceless” work of many, and 
coexist with the trend to make online higher education broadly available and 
discover  new  streams  of  revenue  by  volume  through  massive  open  online 
courses (MOOCs). This trend toward self-reliance may be interpreted as so-
ciety’s experiments with new approaches to acquire knowledge, distribute 
ideas, attain impact, and leverage new distribution channels to bring ideas 
and innovations to scale more efficiently and broadly than traditional aca-
demic channels. The method I propose in this book, specifically the pro-
cesses to learn to acquire knowledge on demand, are highly synergistic with 
these trends.

Eric von Hippel’s work on democratizing innovation and on user tool-
kits  outlines  emerging  opportunities  for  grassroots  innovation  from  users 
and  innovation  communities,  and  the  implications  for  existing  organiza-
tions. This pairs well with innovation prototyping, which offers skills for 
individual innovators to capitalize on the trends von Hippel has document-
ed in his articles and books and demonstrated in his work with corporations. 
In essence, our books share the belief that placing kits designed for trial-and-
error and experimentation in the hands of users can dramatically alter the 
effectiveness of the innovation process. The innovation prototyping kits I 
propose  take  this  idea  a  step  further  by  associating  kits  with  open-ended 
problems rather than constraining them to a specific product or service type. 
Also, the notion of experimentation and prototyping I advocate for in this 

360 

EPILOGUE

book and describe in some of my work goes beyond tinkering with technol-
ogy: I use the phrase “tinker with impact” to acknowledge the need to proto-
type as much of the vehicle to impact as possible to iterate through different 
choices for users, market, mode of impact, audience.

In general, the management literature has addressed a similar kind of ex-
perimentation  with  a  different  focus  on  business  and  entrepreneurship 
(Schrage’s Serious Play) and more generally as an instrument in management 
that organizations ought to embrace (Thomke’s Experimentation Matters).

Readings
Biggs, John. “Raspberry Pi, a Computer Tinkerer’s Dream.” New York Times, 
January 30, 2013.

Bornstein, David. “Open Education for a Global Economy.” New York Times, 
July 11, 2012.

Lin, Thomas. “Cracking Open the Scientific Process.” New York Times, Janu-
ary 16, 2012.

Mycroft, Alan. Raspberry Pi—Why, What, How. Presentation, University of 
Cambridge, June 15, 2012 (http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~am21/slides/CAS12.
pdf ).

Nielsen, Michael. “Is scientific publishing about to be disrupted?” Blog post, 
June 29, 2009 (http://michaelnielsen.org/blog/is-scientific-publishing-about 
-to-be-disrupted).

Nielsen, Michael. Reinventing Discovery: The New Era of Networked Science. 
Princeton University Press, 2011.

O’Leary, Amy. “Worries over Defense Dept. money for ‘hackerspaces.’” New 
York Times, October 5, 2012.

Pearce,  Joshua  M.  “Building  research  equipment  with  free,  open-source 
hardware.” Science 337, no. 6100 (2012): 1303–1304.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

361

Perez-Breva, Luis. “Commoditizing technology innovation.” In Proceedings 
of Skoltech Innovation Symposium, fall 2014.

Perez-Breva,  Luis.  Prototyping  Technological  Innovations—Tinkering,  
reasoning, and experimenting: Innovation is a process. MIT Sloan Experts,  
October 2, 2012 (http://mitsloanexperts.mit.edu/luis-perez-breva-prototyping 
-technology-innovations-tinkering-reasoning-and-experimenting-innovation 
-is-a-process/).

Schrage, Michael. “Kits and revolutions.” Make, special issue, January 2011.
Schrage, Michael. Serious Play: How the World’s Best Companies Simulate to 
Innovate. Harvard Business School Press, 2000.
Thomke, Stefan H. Experimentation Matters: Unlocking the Potential of New 
Technologies for Innovation. Harvard Business School Press, 2003.

Self-reliance books (examples) and selected online resources

Baichtal, John. Hack This: 24 Incredible Hackerspace Projects from the DIY 
Movement. Que, 2012.
Barron, Natania. Geek Mom: Projects, Tips, and Adventures for Moms and 
Their 21st-Century Families. Potter Craft, 2012.
Buckley, Patrick, and Lily Binns. The Hungry Scientist Handbook: Electric 
Birthday Cakes, Edible Origami, and Other DIY Projects for Techies, Tinker-
ers, and Foodies. Collins Living, 2008.
Denmead, Ken. Geek Dad: Awesomely Geeky Projects and Activities for Dads 
and Kids to Share. Gotham Books, 2010.

362 

EPILOGUE

Frauenfelder, Mark. Made by Hand: My Adventures in the World of Do-It-
Yourself. Penguin, 2011.
Plant, Malcolm. Understand Electronics. Teach Yourself, 2010.
Thompson, Robert Bruce. Illustrated Guide to Home Chemistry Experiments. 
O’Reilly Media, 2008.

Thompson,  Robert  Bruce,  and  Barbara  Fritchman  Thompson. Illustrated 
Guide to Home Biology Experiments: All Lab, No Lecture. O’Reilly Media, 
2012.

Thompson,  Robert  Bruce,  and  Barbara  Fritchman  Thompson. Illustrated 
Guide to Home Forensic Science Experiments: All Lab, No Lecture. O’Reilly 
Media, 2012.

Wohlsen,  Marcus.  Biopunk:  Solving  Biotech’s  Biggest  Problems  in  Kitchens 
and Garages. Current, 2012.
VanderMeer, Jeff, and S. J. Chambers. The Steampunk Bible: An Illustrated 
Guide to the World of Imaginary Airships, Corsets and Goggles, Mad Scientists, 
and Strange Literature. Abrams, 2011.

The Home Scientist (http://www.thehomescientist.com/index.html)

Khan Academy (http://www.khanacademy.org)

Scitable: A Collaborative Learning Space for Science (http://www.nature.
com/scitable)

Kuhn versus Popper

There are noticeable differences in the foundational understanding of the 
scientific method between my book and popular books that conflate innova-
tion and entrepreneurship. Lean Startup, Design Thinking, Business Model 

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

363

Generation, Blue Ocean Strategy, disciplined entrepreneurship, and rapid 
prototyping all seem to build their empirical foundation from Karl Popper’s 
interpretation of the scientific method. For example, The Lean Startup and 
design thinking both adapt product design methodologies to the world of 
startups. The Lean Startup is rooted in SyncDev’s approach to product de-
sign and management, and design thinking is rooted in IDEO’s highly suc-
cessful methodology born also out of product design.

I stand with Thomas Kuhn, who likened the Popperian experimental 
method to one from which no paradigm shift can emerge. Popper’s approach 
significantly constrains the scope of innovation; it is useful only when the 
purpose is not to challenge existing theory (in this case, perhaps, a product) 
but to validate it and refine it.

There is some overlap in keywords between my book and the other works 
noted above that makes distinguishing between methods difficult at times. I 
have tried to address this keyword confusion by supplying precise definitions 
for keywords we share (e.g., problem, learning) and through this academic 
commentary.

Readings
Aulet, Bill. Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 Steps to a Successful Startup. Wi-
ley, 2013.

Doorley, Scott, and Scott Witthoft. Make Space: How to Set the Stage for 
Creative Collaboration. Wiley, 2011.
Fried,  Jason,  and  David  Heinemeier  Hansson.  Rework.  Crown  Business, 
2010.

Kelley, Tom. The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from IDEO, Amer-
ica’s Leading Design Firm. Crown Business, 2001.
Kelley, Tom, and David Kelley. Creative Confidence: Unleashing the Creative 
Potential Within Us All. Crown Business, 2013.

364 

EPILOGUE

Kim, W. Chan, and Renée Mauborgne. Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create 
Uncontested  Market  Space  and  Make  the  Competition  Irrelevant.  Harvard 
Business Review Press, 2013.

Kuhn,  Thomas  S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,  second  enlarged 
edition. University of Chicago Press, 1970.

Lewin, Tamar. “Massive open online courses prove popular, if not lucrative 
yet.” New York Times, January 7, 2013.
Liedtka, Jeanne, and Tim Ogilvie. Designing for Growth: A Design Thinking 
Toolkit for Managers. Columbia University Press, 2013.
Osterwalder,  Alexander,  and  Yves  Pigneur.  Business  Model  Generation:  A 
Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers. Wiley, 2013.
Popper, Karl R. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. Hutchinson, 1959.
Ries, Eric. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous In-
novation to Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Business, 2011.
Warfel,  Todd  Zaki. Prototyping: A Practitioner’s Guide.  Rosenfeld  Media, 
2009.

Wildman,  Gill,  and  Nick  Durrant.  The  Politics  of  Prototyping.  Lulu.com, 
2013.

Learning and innovating

Several authors have likened innovation to learning. In Inside the Black Box, 
Nathan Rosenberg outlines how innovation emerges from several different 
kinds of learning. He discusses several forms of learning; most notable is 
learning by using, which may lead to “disembodied knowledge” that in turn 
may  lead  to  the  modification  of  the  original  hardware.  This  is  consistent 

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

365

with my presentation of parts and knowledge with which to inform and ma-
terialize a larger reality after systematizing learning. Rosenberg further re-
lates “learning by using” to the early work of Eric von Hippel, which von 
Hippel himself later built upon for his book Democratizing Innovation and 
his work on product kits.

The kind of learning I discuss in this book builds on the relationship 
between innovation, user-driven innovation, and learning premised both by 
Rosenberg and von Hippel with respect to knowledge emerging from prod-
ucts. I take that relationship as a fundamental principle and extend it to any 
kind of knowledge that may be obtained about or with a part, whether a 
product or not. I build upon it to propose a method of exploration to guide 
that learning.

The relationship between learning and innovation is discussed frequently 
in the innovation and entrepreneurship literature. Peter Denning and Rob-
ert Dunham’s book The Innovator’s Way describes thoroughly the essential 
practices  to  achieve  innovation  and  supports  the  view  of  innovation  as  a 
learning  process.  Denning  and  Dunham  distinguish  between  “invention 
practices” (sensing, envisioning, and offering) and the “entrepreneurial prac-
tices” that follow them. Peter Drucker writes of a systematic entrepreneur-
ship in connection with learning. Schein also relates learning with innova-
tion as elements in organizational management.

In general, the economics and management literature does a comprehen-
sive job of specifying the outcomes of innovation as a learning process. More 
recently, popular business books such as The Lean Startup and books on “de-
sign thinking” have invoked learning as an element in the process, although 
other than noting that learning happens they never define it explicitly.

The academic management and economics literature is more precise in 
the use of learning, and closer in intent to the use in this book. However, 
learning is generally considered an outcome of the process: learning happens. 
In this book, I explore strategies to fuel that learning. That is, I pay attention 
to the processes and experiences with respect to how they induce learning, 
which allows for beginning the conversation well before there is a plan for an 
organization or an idea for a product.

366 

EPILOGUE

The notion of learning used in in this book takes that definition one step 
further by incorporating what we know about learning from Artificial Intel-
ligence to build a micro-foundation for learning—such as the concept of 
near misses, knowledge representation, and more recent work on stories and 
the relationship between cognitive science and artificial intelligence. It also 
incorporates what is known in the education and psychological literature as 
experiential learning and the development of mastery experiences to develop 
an operational logic for the acquisition and practice of skills.

The behavioral and psychological literature has addressed the question 
of the acquisition of expert performance and the distinction between “tal-
ent” and “learning” at length with works on self-efficacy and deliberate prac-
tice. As an example, the literature on deliberate practice resolves the “born” 
or “made” question for a number of fields. Specifically, it discards the notion 
that particularly gifted individuals may need less time to acquire the specific 
skill. Rather, it suggests that particularly gifted individuals may find different 
motivations or work around resources differently so that they acquire a skill 
comparatively faster than people devoting less time to deliberate practice. 
But the overall practice time needed is the same.

The same findings have been extended to the acquisition of entrepre-

neurial intention and self-efficacy through education.

In their report, Edward Roberts and Charles Eesly show results that sug-
gest that repeat entrepreneurship is accompanied with an increased success 
rate, which one may take for an indication that entrepreneurship can indeed 
be learned through practice.

This all suggests that the question of whether entrepreneurship and in-
novation can be learned is moot. The question whether it can be taught isn’t 
really a question about an attribute of the field but about the skill of the 
teacher and the adequacy of the pedagogical approach chosen. In a recent 
paper, William Lucas, Ilia Dubinsky, and I presented results obtained over 
three editions of a workshop on innovating I developed in which we show 
that the self-efficacy of students, considered to be a predictor of entrepre-
neurial  intent,  can  be  greatly  increased  by  developing  educational  experi-
ences that build on the concepts in this book.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

367

Readings
Ajzen, Icek. “Perceived behavioral control, self-efficacy, locus of control, and 
the theory of planned behavior.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 32, no. 
4  (2002): 665–683.

Ajzen, Icek. “The theory of planned behavior.” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 50, no. 2 (1991): 179–211.

Autio, Erkko, Robert H. Keeley, Magnus Klofsten, George G. C. Parker, and 
Michael Hay. “Entrepreneurial intent among students in Scandinavia and in 
the USA.” Enterprise and Innovation Management Studies 2, no. 2 (2001): 
145–160.

Bandura, Albert. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cogni-
tive Theory. Prentice-Hall, 1986.

Bandura,  Albert.  “Self-efficacy:  toward  a  unifying  theory  of  behavioral 
change.” Psychological Review 84, no. 2 (1977): 191–215.

Baum, J. Robert, and Edwin A. Locke. “The relationship of entrepreneurial 
traits, skill, and motivation to subsequent venture growth.” Journal of Ap-
plied psychology 89, no. 4 (2004): 587–598.

Berzak, Yevgeny, Andrei Barbu, Daniel Harari, Boris Katz, and Shimon Ull-
man. “Do you see what I mean?: Visual resolution of linguistic ambiguities.” 
Paper presented at Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing, Lisbon, 2015.

Bird, Barbara. “Implementing entrepreneurial ideas: The case for intention.” 
Academy of Management Review 13, no. 3 (1988): 442–453.

Boyd, Nancy G., and George S. Vozikis. “The influence of self-efficacy on 
the development of entrepreneurial intentions and actions.” Entrepreneur-
ship Theory and Practice 18 (1994): 63–77.

368 

EPILOGUE

Brooks, Rodney A. “Intelligence without representation.” Artificial intelli-
gence 47, no. 1 (1991): 139–159.
Denning, Peter J., and Robert Dunham. The Innovator’s Way: Essential Prac-
tices for Successful Innovation. MIT Press, 2010.
Drucker, Peter F. Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practice and Principles. 
HarperCollins, 1985.

Elfving, Jennie, Malin Brännback, and Alan Carsrud. “Toward a contextual 
model of entrepreneurial intentions.” In Understanding the Entrepreneurial 
Mind, ed. A. L. Carsrud and M. Brännback. Springer, 2009.

Ericsson, K. Anders, Ralf T. Krampe, and Clemens Tesch-Römer. “The role 
of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance.” Psychological 
Review 100, no. 3 (1993): 363–406.

Fitzsimmons, Jason R., and Evan J. Douglas. “Interaction between feasibility 
and desirability in the formation of entrepreneurial intentions.” Journal of 
Business Venturing 26, no. 4 (2011): 431–440.

Gershman, Samuel J., Eric J. Horvitz, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. “Computa-
tional rationality: A converging paradigm for intelligence in brains, minds, 
and machines.” Science 349, no. 6245 (2015): 273–278.

Krueger,  Norris  F.,  Michael  D.  Reilly,  and  Alan  L.  Carsrud.  “Competing 
models of entrepreneurial intentions.” Journal of Business Venturing 15, no. 5 
(2000): 411–432.

Lucas, William, Luis Perez-Breva, and Ilia Dubinsky. “Assessing the transfer 
of entrepreneurial education from MIT to the Skoltech Institute of Science 
and Technology.” Presented at Triple Helix International Conference, Sep-
tember 2014.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

369

Moriano, Juan A., Marjan Gorgievski, Mariola Laguna, Ute Stephan, and 
Kiumars Zarafshani. “A cross-cultural approach to understanding entrepre-
neurial intention.” Journal of Career Development  39, no. 2 (2011): 162–185.

Roberts, Edward B., and Charles E. Eesley. “Entrepreneurial impact: The 
role of MIT—An updated report.” Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneur-
ship 7, no. 1–2 (2011): 1–149.
Rosenberg, Nathan. Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics, Cam-
bridge University Press, 1982.

Schein, Edgar H. “Three cultures of management: The Key to Organiza-
tional Learning.” Sloan Management Review 38, no. 1 (1996): 9–20.

Schulz, Laura. “The origins of inquiry: Inductive inference and exploration 
in early childhood.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 16, no. 7 (2012): 382–389.

Shapero, Albert, and Lisa Sokol, L. “Social dimensions of entrepreneurship.” 
In The Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship, ed. C. A. Kent, D. L. Sexton, and K. 
H. Vesper. Prentice-Hall, 1982.

Stajkovic, Alexander D., and Fred Luthans. “Self-efficacy and work-related 
performance:  A  meta-analysis.”  Psychological  Bulletin  124,  no.  2  (1998): 
240–261.

Tattersall, Ian. “An evolutionary framework for the acquisition of symbolic 
cognition by Homo sapiens.” Comparative Cognition & Behavior Reviews 3 
(2008): 99–114.

Tierney, John. “What is nostalgia good for? Quite a bit, research shows.” 
New York Times, July 8, 2013.
von Hippel, Eric. Democratizing Innovation. MIT Press, 2005.
von Hippel, Eric. “User toolkits for innovation.” Journal of Product Innova-
tion Management 18, no. 4 (2001): 247–257.

370 

EPILOGUE

von Hippel, Eric, and Ralph Katz. “Shifting innovation to users via toolkits.” 
Management Science 48, no. 7 (2002): 821–833.

Winston, Patrick Henry. The Genesis Story Understanding and Story Tell-
ing System: A 21st Century Step Toward Artificial Intelligence. Minds & 
Machines Memo No. 109, Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, 2014.

Winston, Patrick Henry. “The strong story hypothesis and the directed per-
ception hypothesis.” Presented at AAAI Fall Symposium, Menlo Park, Cali-
fornia, 2011.

No thing is new

The notion that novelty, technological progress, and ultimately innovation 
emerge from the combination of mostly non-new components has been ex-
plored in the economics literature. Martin Weitzman, for instance, intro-
duces recombinant growth to “open the black box” of technological progress 
and explain the emergence of growth as a function of the combination of 
earlier knowledge. Nathan Rosenberg’s book Inside the Black Box also ex-
plores the relationship between technology and growth as well as the many 
indirect ways in which technology enters society and the broadened mean-
ing of technology beyond science.

In likening the emergence of Greenpeace to the development of high-
technology innovations, I am building on a broadened meaning of technol-
ogy in which I associate the elements of Greenpeace with parts much as we 
would think of parts in a technological innovation. This broadened defini-
tion of technological innovation is consistent with how technological prog-
ress is generally presented in macroeconomics, but may be less immediately 
familiar and may appear to be at odds with how technology is generally de-
fined in terms of science and engineering.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

371

Readings
Rosenberg, Nathan. Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cam-
bridge University Press, 1982.

Weitzman, Martin L. “Recombinant Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics 113, no. 2 (1998): 331–360.

The nonlinear nature of innovation

James Utterback, Clayton Christensen, and several others have written (ex-
plicitly or implicitly) about the outcomes and consequences of the nonlinear 
nature of innovation. In general, the management literature on innovation—
such as Christensen’s book The Innovator’s Dilemma, Henry Chesbrough’s 
book Open Innovation, and Larry Downes and Paul Nunes’s article “Big-bang 
disruption”—focus on the receiving end of innovation, when innovations 
pose threats to existing organizations and how these organizations may re-
spond. These are all indirect observables of the nonlinear nature of innova-
tion. Everett Rogers’s adoption curve too can be interpreted as an indirect 
observable of these nonlinearities, as are S-curves.

Geoffrey Moore’s chasm is another example. Moore’s warning that the 
chasm may be a by-product of over-targeting of an early segment of the mar-
ket and his invitation to explore alternate markets adjacencies or evolutions 
of the original idea are analogous to the approach to nonlinearities I offer in 
this book. The analogy, however, is difficult to draw in foresight, because the 
reference to a chasm implies a discontinuity that, in foresight, is indistin-
guishable  from  the  prospect  of  failure.  Moore’s  discussions  of  growth  in 
numbers and of the progression to build a whole product, though different 
in approach, are consistent with the approach to scale through systematiza-
tion in this book.

More generally, the literatures of management, business, and social sci-
ence have made critical contributions by explaining the nature of the innova-
tion  process  by  its  outcomes.  Agents  in  the  innovation  process  (capital, 

372 

EPILOGUE

corporations, policy makers, universities, and so on) now have reason to ex-
pect nonlinearities and disruption from the innovation process (as Chris-
tensen and Utterback have showed), to welcome the appearance of a sudden 
change in direction and pivots as potentially good (Ries), and to view univer-
sity ecosystems as important agents of economic growth (Roberts and Ees-
ley). They now have a variety of models from which to choose their preferred 
mode of interaction with innovation and innovators (Chesbrough, von Hip-
pel, Rothwell). This has created a highly sophisticated and unprecedented 
level of demand for innovations. In some of my earlier work, I hypothesized 
that this level of demand, coupled with the increased online availability of 
knowledge and parts, creates an opportunity to propose new strategies to 
empower innovators.

Whereas  the  literature  cited  above  identifies  behaviors,  communities, 
movements, trends, and crowd-sourcing opportunities, I identify the capa-
bilities and skills that individual innovators need in order to refine and dif-
fuse innovations in a forward-looking manner.

Readings
Chesbrough, Henry W. “The era of open innovation.” MIT Sloan Manage-
ment Review 44, no. 3 (2003): 35–41.
Chesbrough, Henry W. Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating 
and Profiting from Technology. Harvard Business School Press, 2006.
Christensen, Clayton M. The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies 
Cause Great Firms to Fail. Harvard Business School Press, 2013.
Downes, Larry, and Paul Nunes. “Big bang disruption.” Harvard Business Re-
view, March 2013: 44–56.
Moore, Geoffrey A. Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling Disruptive 
Products to Mainstream Customers. HarperBusiness, 1991.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

373

Perez-Breva,  Luis.  “Commoditizing  technology  innovation..”  In  Proceed-
ings of Skoltech Innovation Symposium, Fall 2014.

Rogers, Everett M. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press, 1995.
Rothwell, Roy. “Towards the fifth-generation innovation process.” Interna-
tional Marketing Review 11, no. 1 (1994): 7–31.
Utterback. James M. Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation: How Companies 
Can Seize Opportunities in the Face of Technological Change. Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, 1994.

Organizational theory and computation

In chapter 3, I outline a relationship between organization and theory of 
computation. In later chapters, I draw a similar connection between organi-
zation and a machine (in the physics meaning of the word). Although I ar-
rive at that argument deductively in a non-standard way, the relationship 
between computational theory and organizational theory is not new; rather, 
it is an ongoing field of work, outlined, for instance, by Kathleen Carley in 
the 1995 inaugural issue of Computational and Mathematical Organization 
Theory.

Readings
Carley, Kathleen M.  “Computational and mathematical organization theory: 
Perspective and directions.” Computational & Mathematical Organization 
Theory 1, no. 1 (1995): 39–56.

Parts and modularity

The discussion of parts builds from the premise that innovation may emerge 
through learning by using and through a process of generating knowledge as 

374 

EPILOGUE

a user of other knowledge (not just products). Parts and knowledge are inter-
changeable; this line of reasoning resonates with the management literature 
on modularity. Management has only recently begun to explore the concept 
of modularity as an instrument in organizational management. I believe the 
concept  of  modularity  offers  an  interesting  point  of  connection  with  the 
concepts I introduce in chapters 6, 11, and 12, and links with the discussion of 
how to make organizations work in chapters 8–10 and in this epilogue.

Readings
Baldwin, Carliss Y., and Kim B. Clark. Design Rules: The Power of Modular-
ity. MIT Press, 2000.
Baldwin, Carliss Y., and Kim B. Clark. Modularity in the Design of Complex 
Engineering Systems. Springer, 2006.

Baldwin, Carliss Y., and Eric von Hippel. “Modeling a paradigm shift: From 
producer innovation to user and open collaborative innovation.” Organiza-
tion Science 22, no. 6 (2011): 1399–1417.

People and teams

My discussion of how innovation prototypes accrue people follows a logic 
that is consistent with Deborah Ancona and Henrik Bresman’s discussion of 
the attributes of effective teams. However, Ancona and Bresman consider 
the team as the basic unit while acknowledging that teams are flexible in 
many ways, including membership. In the end, teams build innovations, but 
I consider the team as one of the (evolving) outcomes of the process rather 
than a basic unit of the process. By placing the emphasis on the problem the 
innovation prototype makes tangible and on how the innovation prototype 
accrues people, I emphasize the need for people to develop a shared language 
to influence and receive influence, which follows from the notion of cosmo-
politan influentials from Merton.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

375

With respect to teams, many others have analyzed quite effectively and 
praised the merits of cross-disciplinary work, but their starting point is that 
we are somehow products of disciplines. This book takes a default position 
that disciplinary boundaries are arbitrary—as exemplified by the Harvard 
University lecture series on science and cooking. I leave it up to the reader to 
justify  why  we  should  accept  overspecialization  as  a  default  mode  of 
operation.

Relevant  to  the  issue  of  conversing  with  people,  the  approach  in  this 
book  differs  from  traditional  approaches  to  product  design  and  develop-
ment in which the existence of a product helps constrain the search space to 
a set of features (as in Karl Ulrich and Steven Eppinger’s book Product De-
sign and Development). Innovating does not try to replace any of those in-
sights, but instead notes that in the absence of one such constraint it is first 
necessary to learn what questions are worth asking. That normally happens 
through unstructured and often unplanned conversations. Innovators need 
to learn to extract information from those conversations.

Those who are interested in how this approach connects with managing 
people may want to read Peter Drucker’s book The Effective Executive, which 
provided some of the inspiration for my focus on people and their contribu-
tions in chapter 4.

As an endeavor matures and processes are required, there are excellent 
works in the literatures of business and management that explain how to 
develop more formal methods for interviewing and selecting people—a mat-
ter of management that is beyond the scope of this book.

Readings
Ancona, Deborah, and Henrik Bresman. X-Teams: How to Build Teams That 
Lead, Innovate, and Succeed. Harvard Business School Press, 2013.
Bock, Laszlo. Work Rules!: Insights from Inside Google That Will Transform 
How You Live and Lead. Hachette, 2015.

376 

EPILOGUE

Borrego, Maura, and Lynita K. Newswander. “Characteristics of successful 
cross-disciplinary  engineering  education  collaborations.”  Journal  of  Engi-
neering Education 97, no. 2 (2008): 123–134.
Drucker, Peter F. The Effective Executive. Harper Collins, 1967.

Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Science. Science and Cooking. 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/itunes-u/science-and-cooking/id3992279 
91?mt=10.

Merton, Robert K. Social Theory and Social Structure. Free Press, 1957.

Mohammed, Susan, and Brad C. Dumville. “Team mental models in a team 
knowledge  framework:  Expanding  theory  and  measurement  across  disci-
plinary  boundaries.”  Journal  of  Organizational  Behavior  22,  no.  2  (2001): 
89–106.

Ulrich, Karl T., and Steven Eppinger. Product Design and Development, fifth 
edition. McGraw-Hill, 2011.

Problem solving

This book builds upon the theory on heuristics as outlined in George Pólya’s 
How to Solve It and generalizes from that work to a more general kind of 
problem that lacks sufficient definition to fit into one of his categories of 
problems (find, prove, pragmatic).

The methods and operations I discuss in this book rely heavily on the 
notion that innovations solve problems. The concept “problem,” however, is 
ambiguous. It is used differently in different disciplines, and it is rarely de-
fined precisely. The three criteria I enumerate at the beginning of chapter 
2—namely, solvable, recognizable, and verifiable, hence decidable—are 
enough to define a problem, and can easily be found to be true from the per-
spective  of  the  endpoint  of  the  eventual  innovation.  They  also  provide  a 

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

377

connection with the literature on problem solving and, more specifically, on 
modern heuristics.

Pólya defines modern heuristics as a field concerned with “the process of 
solving  problems,  especially  the  mental  operations  typically  useful  in  this 
process.” The definition of problems by my three criteria draws on Pólya’s 
powerful work without restricting our attention to mathematical problems, 
as he does.

Pólya  enumerates  three  specific  kinds  of  problems:  problems  to  find, 
problems to prove, and practical problems. The first two are specific kinds of 
mathematical problems characterized by a clear and precise problem defini-
tion. The third refers to more complex and less sharply defined problems 
that require knowledge and concepts also less sharply defined. He argues 
that solving practical problems eventually requires solving several problems 
to find and prove, and that data in practical problems is inherently inexhaust-
ible, which implies the need for judgment and approximations. Pólya argues 
that while more experience may be needed to solve practical problems, the 
fundamental motives and procedures of solution required to solve a practical 
problem are the same as those required to solve mathematical problems.

The examples of practical problems Pólya supplies focus mainly on large 
engineering challenges—for example, building a bridge—in which the end-
point is reasonably well known. The problems we are interested in for inno-
vation, while eminently practical, are slightly more general than his examples. 
They satisfy all the attributes from practical problems and, in addition, the 
endpoint is also elusive.

Reading
Pólya, George. How to Solve It. Princeton University Press, 1945.

378 

EPILOGUE

The relationship among scale, execution, and organization 
building

Chapters 8–10 of this book build a sequence around the elements often as-
sociated with execution in books on entrepreneurship: marketing your idea 
(or pitching), fundraising, and growth. I try to add a layer of resolution to 
these elements by associating them with scale, relating them to skills that may 
be refined through practice, and showing how that practice relates to the 
concepts earlier in the book.

My presentation is not intended to replace the existing academic litera-
ture on these topics, but to provide an anchor point for doers so they can 
relate to that literature. I consider this topic to be underexplored in the busi-
ness entrepreneurial literature, where growth is often conflated with its ob-
servable—sales—and the discussion rarely goes deep enough to allow for an 
understanding  of  the  organizational  and  technical  implications  of  that 
growth.

Edgar Schein’s work relating organization and learning points to a simi-
lar problem when noting the difficulty to relate operational, executive, and 
engineering cultures within an organization and the need to do so to help 
the organization learn and innovate. Schein discusses the creep that results 
from lack of alignment between these cultures in his section “organizations 
don’t learn; innovations don’t diffuse”—which is consistent with my open-
ing to chapter 9 that “organizations don’t just grow.”

My presentation in chapters 8–10 does not try to address all the prob-
lems relating to organizational building Schein and others raise; that would 
be beyond the book’s scope. But I do articulate how the combination of in-
novation  prototyping  and  the  drive  for  scale  can  help  specify  a  means  to 
align those three cultures.

In chapter 8 I outline the need for salesmanship and conviction; the in-
terested reader may find Robert Cialdini’s book Influence relevant for under-
standing the salesmanship involved in conveying an idea, and may find An-
thony Weston’s  A Rulebook for Arguments useful for understanding how to 

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

379

support an argument convincingly. In chapter 9 I specify the outcomes to 
expect  from  a  negotiation  process,  and  how  to  view  the  negotiation  as  a 
means to strengthen and specify further the task at hand. Numerous books 
about negotiation, such as Roger Fisher, William Ury, and Bruce Patton’s 
Getting to Yes, are relevant for understanding the scope and elements that 
make negotiation a method by which to specify next steps. In chapter 10 I 
introduce  a  new  approach  to  thinking  about  organizational  growth  that 
brings  together  the  precise  definition  and  implications  of  scale  emerging 
from engineering with the specifications of organizational growth emerging 
in the management literature. To the best of my knowledge, this conceptual 
approach to present growth and scale hasn’t been explored elsewhere.

As a whole, the sequence of chapters 8–10 presents a recurrence rule as an 
aid to understanding scale and organizational growth in a way that is analo-
gous to the presentation of learning and problem solving in chapters 7 and 2. 
Together, the story outlined in chapters 2 and 7–10 is a story of problem 
solving, learning, systematization, and optimization for scale that is uncon-
strained by premature choices and assumptions. I have left the elements in-
volved in human decision making and creating organizations that work out 
of chapters 8–10 not because they are unimportant, but because they are ei-
ther well explained elsewhere or the corresponding treatment would have 
implied a divergence from the theme of the book.

From an organizational standpoint, the sequence discussed in chapters 
8–10 is consistent with the criteria offered in the literature for addressing the 
question of growth strategically through acquisitions and alliances (Roberts 
and Liu), outsourcing (Quinn), supply chain and organization (Fine), com-
petitive relations (Brandenburger and Nalebuff ), and opportunity identifi-
cation (Shane).

Finally, my presentation in chapters 8–10 is consistent with how compa-
nies such as 3M and IBM have been able to combine internal innovation 
with  innovation  powered  by  acquisitions  and  sales—exits—from  mature 
business units.

380 

EPILOGUE

Readings
Brandenburger, Adam M., and Barry J. Nalebuff. Co-opetition. Doubleday 
Business, 1996.

Cialdini, Robert B. Influence: Science and Practice, fifth edition. Allyn and 
Bacon, 2008.

Fine, Charles H. “Are you modular or integral? Be sure your supply chain 
knows.” Strategy + Business 39, no. 2 (2005): 1–8.
Fisher, Roger, William Ury, and Bruce Patton. Getting to Yes: Negotiating 
Agreement Without Giving In, second edition. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
1992.

Morrow, David R., and Anthony Weston. A Workbook For Arguments: A 
Complete Course In Critical Thinking. Hackett, 2015.

Quinn, James Brian. “Outsourcing innovation: The new engine of growth.” 
MIT Sloan Management Review 41, no. 4 (2000): 13–28. 
Roberts, Edward B., and Wenyun Kathy Liu. “Ally or acquire.” MIT Sloan 
Management Review 43, no. 1 (2001): 26–34.
Shane, Scott A. Finding Fertile Ground: Identifying Extraordinary Opportu-
nities for New Ventures. Wharton School Publishing, 2004.
Weston, Anthony. A Rulebook for Arguments, fourth edition. Hackett, 2009.

 

ACADEMIC COMMENTARY 

381

notes

Introduction

1.  Rod  Hilton,  “The  Star  Wars  Saga:  Introducing  Machete  Order,”  Absolutely  No  Machete  Juggling  blog 
(www.nomachetejuggling.com/2011/11/11/the-star-wars-saga-suggested-viewing-order/).

Chapter 1

1.  “Theodore Maiman Explains the First Ruby Laser,” presentation at 2008 LaserFest (http://www.laserfest.
org/lasers/video-maiman.cfm).

2.  Jeff Hecht, Beam: The Race to Make the Laser (Oxford University Press, 2005).

3.  The  story  of  the  laser  in  hindsight  can  be  traced  through  several  books.  It  appears  in  Wikipedia  and  a 
number of other places online. I have found the account of how the first laser was put together in only one 
place: a copy of the video of the interview with Dr. Maiman that was shown at a conference on optics in 2008. 
The video cited in note 1 above isn’t even the original; it is a video capture of the video shown on a screen at the 
conference.

4.  The statement (attributed to Ben Metcalfe, who later became Greenpeace’s first chairman) is quoted in Rex 
Weyler’s book Greenpeace: How a Group of Ecologists, Journalists, and Visionaries Changed the World (Rodale, 
2004).

5.  Greenpeace International, “A Chat with the First Rainbow Warriors,” 1996 (http://www.greenpeace.org/
international/en/about/history/founders/first-rainbow-warriors/).

6.  “Steve  Wozniak  (1984  Interview)”  (http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=7RZrv55B6Js).

Chapter 2

1.  Greenpeace International, “A Chat with the First Rainbow Warriors.”

2.  Greenpeace,  “Mission  Statement,”  December  1996  (http://web.archive.org/web/19961228050925/http 
://greenpeace.org/).

3.  If your offering is a consumer product, by the time you are done you will probably no longer use the word 
“problem.” Rather, you’ll likely speak directly about a need. That’s the usual shorthand for the thing people are 
missing to eliminate a specific problem. It is difficult to justify the use of the shorthand when all you have is an 
elusive problem. It just makes you sound as if you know what you are talking about.

4.  United Nations, “UN Water—World Water Day 2013: Water Cooperation” (http://www.unwater.org/
water-cooperation-2013/water-cooperation/facts-and-figures/en/).

5.  Somini Sengupta, “A cheap spying tool with a high creepy factor,” New York Times, August 2, 2013 (http://
bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/02/a-cheap-spying-tool-with-a-high-creepy-factor/).

6.  Kaspar Mossman,  “Amyris Biotechnologies, Emeryville, Calif.,” Scientific American 298, no. 1 (2008): 
42–43.

7.  George Pólya, How to Solve It (Princeton University Press, 1945).

8.  Peter J. Denning, The Innovator’s Way: Essential Practices for Successful Innovation (MIT Press, 2010). 

Chapter 5

1.  What I describe as nonlinear could, depending on the context, be further categorized as a chaotic system, as 
non-deterministic,  or  otherwise—a  level  of  precision  beyond  the  scope  of  the  book.  I  ask  mathematically 
inclined readers to indulge my simplification.

2.  Wayne Grady, Technology: A Groundwork Guide (Groundwood, 2010), quoting Jacob Bielow.

3.  I continue to be amazed that a definition of technology from the mid-1800s is so convenient for my pur-
poses  here—especially  considering  how  fuzzy  the  standard  definition  is  today.  The  Harvard  professor’s  old 
definition captures at once prehistoric tools and the latest nano-gizmo or quantum-mechanical wizardry device. 
That is, it admits the latest near-magical “scary” stuff and the oldest well-known artifacts that ring like déjà vu.

Chapter 6

1.  Were  it  proven  that  ore  is  homogeneously  distributed  across  earth,  acquiring  more  land  would  surely 
increase those odds. But then the challenge would no longer be prospecting. Rather, it would be to conceive a 
method or technology for extracting ore that is not concentrated in a single location. As with selecting ideas, 
you merely traded one problem for another problem (potentially a more difficult one).

384 

NOTES TO CHAPTERS 2–6

Chapter 7

1.  “Astronaut Chris Hadfield Brings Lessons From Space Down to Earth.” (Interview, October 30, 2013). 
Accessed  September  10,  2015.  http://www.npr.org/2013/10/30/241830872/astronaut-chris-hadfield 
-brings-lessons-from-space-down-to-earth.

Part III

1.  “Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of the Imagination,” in Profiles of the Future: An Inquiry into the Limits 
of the Possible, revised edition, Harper & Row, 1973.

Chapter 9

1.  Jenna Wortham,“Success of crowdfunding puts pressure on entrepreneurs,” New York Times, September 17, 
2012.  (www.nytimes.com/2012/09/18/technology/success-of-crowdfunding-puts-pressure-on-entrepreneurs.
html).

2.  Of course, there are some things for which you may not be able to prepare. For instance, if there are indeed 
extraterrestrials and they have unexpected intentions, chances are your protocol for that eventuality will not 
cover them all. And it would probably be pointless for you even to prepare for more than merely warning Hous-
ton of their existence, especially in view of how much more advanced than us they must be to have made it all 
the way here. In that case, you are on your own. I wonder if Chris Hadfield would mind sharing whether the 
astronauts’ preparation considers that eventuality, and to what degree.

Chapter 10

1.  James M. Utterback, Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation: How Companies Can Seize Opportunities in the 
Face of Technological Change (Harvard Business School Press, 1994).

 

NOTES TO CHAPTERS 7–10 

385

index

Academic commentary, 353–381
artificial intelligence, 355–356
behavioral decision-making, 353–354
bounded rationality, 353–354
do-it-yourself kits, 353–381
experimentation, 353–381
induction argument, 357–359
learning, 365–371
nonlinearity, 372–374
novelty, 371–373
organizational theory, 374
parts and modularity, 374–375
people and teams, 375–377
problem-solving, 377–379
scale, execution, and organization building, 

379–381

self-reliance, 362–363
theory of computation, 357, 374

Accidental Empires, 288
Acquisition, 304
Actuarial process, 167 

call for ideas as, 164–165, 169–170
innovation designed as, 163–167

Adobe Kickbox, 168–169
Advisors, 319, 321
Advocacy, 230–259

audience, 235–236, 238

and business model, 244
and communication, 234–235, 241–243, 246–255
and comparables, 250–251
and fundraising, 236–238
getting attention, 241, 246–249
and inquiry and verification, 239–241
meetings as ballet, 245–255
and near misses, 241
and organizations, 244–245
practicing, 238, 247–249
preparation for, 232–233, 241–245, 274–276
process, 239–241
and proof of concept, 252, 255
and prototyping problems, 232–233, 239–248, 

252–256

and risk, 272–275
and scaling up, 298, 302, 304
and space of opportunity, 234, 252–256
stages of, 235–236

Ancona, Deborah, 375
Annotation, 334, 337, 342. See also Documentation
Apple computer, 23, 182

founders, 132
growth of, 288

Artificial intelligence, 355–356
Asimov, Isaac, 181
Assembly line, 20–21. See also Ford innovations

Astronaut example, 195–196, 268
Auxiliary parts, 89–90, 108–109

demonstrating a problem tangibly with, 115, 208
that help move forward, 312

Backrub search engine, 303
Behavioral decision-making, 353–354
Being productively wrong, 7–11, 133, 136–139. See 

also Trial and error 

“Big-bang disruption,” 372
Blue Ocean Strategy, 364
Bounded rationality, 353–354
Brandenburger, Adam and Barry, 380
Bresman, Henrik, 375
Brin, Sergey, 131, 303
Business model, 25, 76, 106, 149, 209, 244, 257, 

290–293, 316, 363

as parts, 88–89, 92–94, 98

Business Model Generation, 363–364

Call for ideas. See Actuarial process
Capstone Projects (MIT), 320
Carley, Kathleen, 374
Cell phone thought experiment, 42
Central limit theorem, 166
Certainty. See also Uncertainty

defined, 267–270

Chance encounters, 130–132
Chesbrough, Henry, 372
Choice. See also Prototyping problems

of endpoint, 51, 228, 377–378
in innovation process, 19–24, 51, 164, 315
of organization, 44, 66
of parts, 81–84, 91, 102
of risk, 261, 267

Christensen, Clayton, 372–373
Cialdini, Robert, 379
Clarke, Arthur C., 224–225, 340, 344, 354
Communication. See also Conversation

and advocacy, 234–235, 241–243, 246–255
and risk, 269, 273–276, 278–279

Communities, 15, 24, 29, 40–42, 129. See also People
Comparables, 250–251, 268, 270–271, 274

Computation, theory of, 44, 357, 374
Computational and Mathematical Organization 

Theory, 374

Confirmation bias, 201, 354
Continuously innovating. See Innovating 

continuously

Conversation, 124–125, 134–139. See also 

Communication

academic commentary on, 376
being told you are wrong, 136–139
documentation as, 333–341
operating principles, 138

Corporate setting, 111, 119, 313, 325

innovating with what you have in a, 111

Cross-disciplinary perspective, 112, 319, 335, 353, 
376. See also Academic commentary; Disciplin-
ary bias

Crowdfunding, 106, 265
Curse of innovation, 23–24, 298
Curve, growth, 242–243

and building organizations, 285, 286–291

Data. See also Statistics

and fear, 133
and giving up too soon, 197–198

Decidable problems, 41–42, 44, 358. See also Proto-

typing problems

Decisions, 164, 170–173, 255. 263. 268, 270, 287, 

296, 314–316, 353–354

based on evidence, 197–198, 317
decision-makers, 42, 170, 316–318, 321, 325
for questions about opportunities, 23
as a sequence of scale-up decisions, 171–172

Deep Blue (IBM), 296
Deep Thought (IBM), 296
Deming, W. Edwards, 359
Democratizing innovation, 360–362
Democratizing Innovation, 366
Denning, Peter, 366
Design Thinking, 363
Development kits, 106, 178–179, 186

388 

INDEX

Disciplinary bias, 112, 151–152, 319. See also Cross-

Evolving problems. See Innovating continuously; Pro-

disciplinary perspective

“Disembodied knowledge,” 365
Disruption

academic commentary on, 372–374
and incremental progress, 28–29, 48
and nonlinearity, 147–148

Distribution strategies, 77
DIY kits, 178–180, 359–362
Documentation, 328–345
approaches to, 331–332
benefits of, 332–333, 334–337
content of, 337–342
and hindsight, 332, 336, 339, 343–344
and “making stuff up,” 322–336
and memory, 331–337

“Do-it-yourself ” ethic, 178–180, 359–362
Doer’s perspective, xxiii. See also Being productively 

wrong

and growth as building atop, 296–297
and mastery of risks, 262–267
Doubt, 267. See also Uncertainty
Downes, Larry, 372
Drucker, Peter, 376
Due diligence, 254
Dunham, Robert, 366

Eames, Charles and Ray, 265–266
Economies of scale, 302
Edison, Thomas, 149–150, 177
Eesley, Charles E., 373
Effective Executive, The, 376
“Elevator pitch,” 135
Endpoint

totyping problems

Execution, entrepreneurial, 379–381. See also Practic-

ing; Scaling up organizations

Experimentation. See also Trial and error

and innovation prototyping kit, 178–179, 184, 

187, 359–362

and scale, 54
and trial and error, 30, 179
Experimentation Matters, 361
Exploration, open-ended, 178, 184

Facebook, 182, 303
Facemash, 303
Failure, 12–17, 372

and giving up, 197–198
and negating your idea, 193–203
and nonlinearity, 148
and parts, 99, 113
as process of questions, 203–211
and risk, 262–265, 269
and scale, 194, 298
timing of, 30–31, 96, 193–196

Fear

and data, 133
of failure, 95
and innovation prototyping kit, 175–176
and lack of knowledge, 82–83
and nonlinearity, 148–150

Fine, Charles H., 380
Fisher, Roger, 380
Fleming, John, 149, 177
Fleming valves, 149
Ford, Henry, 20–21

choice of, 51, 228, 315–317, 377–378
and induction argument, 357–358
and iteration, 61

Entrepreneurship compared to innovation, xviii–xxi, 

363–366

Entrepreneurship theory, xx–xxii
Eppinger, Steven, 376
“Eureka moment,” 183

innovations, 20–21, 24, 48, 66–67, 90, 105, 163
social impact, 20–21, 24

Formal induction argument, 357–359
Forward-looking perspective, 8–18, 275

and advocacy, 234–235, 240–245
Greenpeace, 11–14, 21
versus hindsight, 7, 11–17, 21–27, 41, 64–65, 124, 

154, 236, 287

 

INDEX 

389

Forward-looking perspective (cont.)

and hunches, 11
Kinect, 15–17
laser invention, 8–11
and mastering risk, 264–265
no thing needs to be new, 7, 17, 32, 371
and people, 128
and scale-up as building atop, 286–289

Foundation trilogy, 181
Fourier transform, 263–264
From the Earth to the Moon, 182
Fundraising, 236–238. See also Advocacy

“geeks and suits” duality, 236, 238
traditional methods, 236–237, 238

Funneling ideas, 165, 317
Furniture, Eames, 265–266

Game theory and risk, 273–275
Genentech, 303–304
Genetics, 21–22
Getting to Yes, 380
Giving up, 197–198, 200, 257. See also Laws of 

prediction

cognitive traps, 353–354
confirmation bias, 201, 354

Google, 303–304

founders, 131
and nonlinearity, 149–150

Google AdWords, 303
Grameen Bank, 21
Greenpeace, 152, 181

choice of community, 24
evolution of problem, 64–65
founding members, 12, 65
hunches, 11–14, 38
prototypes, 48
and risk, 265
social impact, 13–14, 24
and technology, 21, 371

and building organizations, 285, 286–291
and innovating continuously, 311–312

Guesses, xxi–xxiii, 175, 206, 358. See also Hunches

and hunches, 45, 62
and negating your idea, 202–203
and risk, 274

Hadfield, Chris, 195–196, 202
Harvard University lecture series on science and 

cooking, 376

Hastings, Reed, 288
Heuristics, 203

modern, 377–378

Hindsight, xxii, 169, 203. See also Forward-looking 

perspective; Time travel

and advocacy, 236, 288
beauty pageant, 304
compared to foresight, 7, 11–17, 21–27, 154, 165, 

200, 213

and documentation, 332, 336–334, 337, 343–344
enabled by documentation, 332–334, 336, 339
and earth-shattering ideas, 11, 14
and evolution of problems, 64–67, 286, 312
and growth, 287, 298
and markets, 
and needs, 25

Hippel, Eric von, 360, 366
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, 135
Honesty, 27, 45, 243

and fairness, 275

How to Solve It, 52–53, 377–378
Hudsucker Proxy, The, 246
Hughes Research Laboratory, 8–9
Human Genome Project, 21–22
Hunches, 1–3, 29, 38–42, 57

and documentation, 331, 333–336
and Ford, 20–21, 24, 48, 66–67, 90, 105, 163
and Greenpeace, 11–14, 21, 24, 38, 48, 64–65, 152, 

181, 371

Growth, academic commentary on, 371–372, 380
Growth curve, 242–243. See also Scaling up 

and innovating continuously, 313–314
and innovation prototyping kit, 168, 170–171, 

organizations

174, 180, 183, 186

390 

INDEX

and Kinect, 15–17, 24, 66
and laser, 8–11, 24, 48, 98–99, 343
and nonlinearity, 146
and Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), 21–22
structuring, 43–47

Hunches, examples of giving the structure of a prob-

lem to

CREEPY DOL, 48–50
Energy independence problem, 46–47
patient-compliance (RFID pill) problem, 55, 

102–103

space travel (X-Prize), 50
strawberry as bacteria experiment, 54–55, 100–102

Hunter, Robert, 12, 65
Hunter, Zoe, 12

IBM, 296
Idea funneling, 165, 317
Idea harvesting, 163–169, 317

“call for ideas,” 164–165
and central limit theorem, 166
and Kickbox, 168–169

“Idea” events, xviii–xix
Impact

and advocacy, 247–248, 252–253
and data, 133
and documentation, 344
and growth curve, 242–243
and innovation prototyping kit, 173–174, 182, 

360–361

and nonlinearity, 152–153
and people, 124, 133, 323
and prototyping, 136–139
and risk, 278

Incremental progress

and disruption, 28–29, 148
and innovation prototyping kit, 176–177
and learning, 177
and organization, 184, 316
and people, 127–128

Induction argument, 357–359
Infinite monkey theorem, 166

Influence, 379
Innovating continuously, 310–327

endpoint, 315–317
final deliverables, 324–325
and growth curve, 311–312
initiating/seeding, 317–318
managing the process, 324–325
and parts, 322–323
and people, 318–322
principles of, 313–315
and scale, 323

Innovating with what you have in corporate settings, 

111, 119
Innovation

and choice, 20–24
designed as an actuarial process, 163–167
in corporate settings, 111
empirical and experimental, xviii–xxi
and novelty, 7–8, 19–24, 38–39, 162, 371
supported by multiple disciplines, 97
traditional concepts of, xx–xxiv, 26–27

Innovation prototyping. See Prototyping problems
Innovation prototyping kit, 160–191

building, 180–183
contents, 182–183, 185–186
defined, 161–163, 173–174
and idea harvesting, 163–169
imagining solutions, 181
primer for, 175–178, 183
principles, 184–185
process, 170–173, 183–185
for teams, 162–174
uses, 163, 178–180

Innovator’s Dilemma, The, 372
Innovator’s Way, The, 366
Inquiry

and advocacy, 233, 238–241, 247, 250
and process of questions, 205–211
and trial and error, 30

Inside the Black Box, 365–366, 371
International Space Station mission, 195–196, 202
Intuition, 335

 

INDEX 

391

Investor zero, 100
Iterations. See also Prototyping problems

defined, 61
and induction argument, 357–359
learning through, 18, 59–63, 146

Jobs, Steve, 132

Kahneman, David, 353–354
Karate Kid, 275
Karate Kid tasks, 275–276
Kazam! machine, 265–266
Kickbox (Adobe), 168–169
Kinect, 15–17, 24, 66
Kits, 178–180, 359–362. See also Innovation proto-

typing kit

Knowledge. See also Learning

available, 53, 82–87, 96, 106–107, 175
and disciplines, 97, 112, 151–152, 319, 335, 376
and innovation prototyping kit primer, 175–176
and parts, 83–84, 374–375
and scale, 176–177

Korad, 9
Kuhn, Thomas, 179, 363–365

Laser, 8–11, 24, 48, 98–99, 343, 383n
Law of Large Numbers, 165
Laws of prediction, 224–225, 340, 344, 354
Lead users, 129
Lean Startup, 363–364, 366
Lean thinking, 168
Learning

academic commentary on, 365–371
and innovating continuously, 324
and nonlinearity, 153–154
online, 360
organizing what you have learned, 224–229
previous, 151–152
and risk, 263–270, 278–279
through parts (prototypes), 83–87, 117–118
two-triangles example, 249
and uncertainty, 263–264, 267–270, 275, 277

using existing knowledge, 112–113
as you go, 18, 27–31, 51–56, 59–63, 66–69

Lee, Johnny Chung, 15–17, 181. See also Kinect
Lenovo, 296
Light bulb, 28, 115, 149, 177, 209
Linearity, 24, 51. See also Nonlinearity

confirmation bias, 201, 354
and leprechauns, 201
Liu, Wenyun Kathy, 380

Maiman, Theodore, 8–9, 174. See also Laser
Make magazine, 359–360
Market pull, 19
Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation, 296
MathWorks, 182
Maxwell, James Clerk, 244
Mentors, 321
Merton, Robert, 375
Metcalfe, Dorothy, 12
Microcontrollers, 115–116
Microfluidics kits, 116
Microloans, 20–21
Miller, Herman, 266
Minimum viable product, paradox of, 18
Minority Report, 23, 66, 181
Mistakes, learning from. See Prototyping problems; 

Trial and Error

Modularity. See also Parts

academic commentary on, 374–375

MOOCs (massive open online courses), 360
Moore, Geoffrey, 372
Muscle memory, xxvi, 68, 238–238

Nalebuff, Barry J., 380
Naming your product, 237
Near misses, 320

and advocacy, 241
defined, 136
and learning, xi, 17–20
and people, 136–138
and questions, 208–211, 214
and taking notes, 331, 334, 339, 341–344, 355

392 

INDEX

Negotiated price task, 276
Negotiation, academic commentary on, 380
Netflix, 77

growth of, 288

Packard, David, 132
Page, Larry, 131, 303
Paradox, xvii–xix, 7, 16, 66, 165, 169, 262–263

and minimum viable product, 26–27

Nonlinearity, 24–27, 51, 144–159, 384n. See also 

Parts, 81–121

Linearity

academic commentary on, 372–374
advantages of/leveraging, 148, 150–151
and chasm, 372
and conventional wisdom, 151–152
defined, 146–149
and evidence, 30, 197–198, 205
and impact, 152–153
and learning, 153–154
and practice, 150, 154
and scale, 144–159, 300
and time, 154–155

Non-tangible aspects of problems, 91–94
Norvig, Peter, 355
Notes. See Documentation
Novelty, 7–8, 19–24, 38–39, 162, 371
academic commentary on, 371–372

Nunes, Paul, 372

O’Connor, Brendan, 48–50
Open innovation, 360
Open Innovation, 372
Organizational theory, academic commentary on, 

374

Organizations, 40–41. See also Scaling up 

organizations

and advocacy, 244–245
and choice, 44, 66
and documentation, 341
imagined, 76–79
and incremental progress, 184, 316
and innovation prototyping kit, 184
model, 244
organizing what you have learned, 224–229
purpose of, 44

academic commentary on, 374–375
accessible, 106–109
and advocacy, 239
auxiliary, 89–90, 108–109
choosing, 107–110, 112–113
in corporate settings, 111
defined, 84–85, 88–90, 209
and documentation, 333–335, 339–340
examples, 95–99, 106–107
and innovating continuously, 311–312, 315, 

322–323

and innovation prototyping kit, 174, 182, 185
and limited resources, 81–83, 96–102, 108–110
and nonlinearity, 150–151
for non-tangible aspects of problems, 91–94, 

103–105

and process of questions, 208–210
purpose of, 90–91, 104–107
and risk, 270, 272
and scale, 99–103, 113–118, 298–299, 302
and scaling up, 298–299, 302
using for learning, 83–88, 105, 110, 112–113

Patents, 185–187
Patton, Bruce, 380
PCR, 21–22
People, 122–143. See also Advocacy; Teams

academic commentary on, 375–377
accruing, 126–127
chance encounters, 130–132
and conversation, 124–125, 134–139
and documentation, 340–341
finding, 129–132
and information, 127–129
and innovating continuously, 315, 318–324
and innovation prototyping kit, 164–174, 182
and money, 128–129
and nonlinearity, 150–151

 

INDEX 

393

People (cont.)

and parts, 123–124
“profiling,” 130–131
and risk, 272
and skills, 127–128
Pilot mentality, 147
Pilot plants, 293
Plan-Do-Check-Act, 359
Pólya, George, 52–53, 62, 255, 358–359, 377–378
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), 21–22
Popper, Karl R., 363–365
Practicing

advocacy, 234–235, 238, 239
and being wrong, 193–195
and documentation, 335, 337
and learning, 27–29, 45, 154
and risk, 274–277

Predictability, 267. See also Uncertainty
Prediction, Clarke’s laws of, 224–225, 340, 344, 354
Privacy protection simulation, 48–50
Problem, definition of, 357–358, 377–378
Problems. See Prototyping problems
Problem-solving, 29–31, 384n

academic commentary on, 377–379
innovating as, 67
through negating your idea, 193–203
as process of questions, 203–211
scaling up organizations, 297–298
Problem statements, 40–41, 46–47

and fundraising, 237

Process of questions, 203, 205–211

and advocacy, 250
assessing progress, 212–213
examples of questions, 204, 206–211, 213
general attributes, 214
and negating your idea, 193–203
and parts, 208–210
and updating, 214–217

Product Design and Development, 376
Progress, assessing, 212–213
Proof of concept

and advocacy, 252, 255

layering, 58, 62, 113–114
and scale, 113–114, 194, 293, 297–299, 304, 323

Prototyping problems, 37–73

and advocacy, 232–233, 239–248, 252–256
attributes of decidable problems, 41–43, 45
compared to learning language, 28–29
defined, 29–31, 91, 384n
and hunches, 39–40, 57
learning as you go, 66–69
making problems tangible, 48–51
overcoming difficulties, 52–53
phases of problem solving, 51–56
postulating problems, 37–42
questioning your idea, 202–211
and scale, 53–66
simulating, 48–49, 58
solving by innovation prototyping, 29–31
and structuring problems, 43, 45–47
updating, 214–217

Prototyping at scale, 53–62

describing prototype, 59–60
having hunches, 57
reformulating problem, 57–58
restating problem, 59–61
structuring problem, 57

Questionnaires

and conversations, 131, 134
and documentation, 340–341

Questions, process of. See Process of questions
Quinn, James Brian, 380

Rainbow-colored milk experiment, 86–88, 90
Recognizable problems, 41, 44
Recombinant growth, 371–372
Record-keeping. See Documentation
Recurrence rule, 60, 380
Referral experiment, 104–105
Research papers, 185–186
Resource-friendly scaling. See Prototyping at scale
Resources. See also Parts

and advocacy, 231

394 

INDEX

limited access to, 81–83, 96–102, 108–110
and time and scale, 155

Ries, Eric, 372–374
Risk, 260–280. See also Uncertainty

and advocacy, 272–275
and choices, 261, 267
and communication, 269, 273–276, 278–279
defined, 267–270
doer’s perspective, 262–267
and scale, 272–273
tolerance for, 125, 272
traditional perspective, 261–262, 270–271
and uncertainty, 262, 264, 267–272, 385n

Roberts, Edward B., 373, 380
Roddenberry, Gene, 181
Rogers, Everett, 372
Rosenberg, Nathan, 365–366, 371
Rothwell, Roy, 373
Rulebook for Arguments, A, 379–380
Russell, Stuart, 355

Scale

academic commentary on, 379–381
and innovation prototyping kit, 171–172, 176
and nonlinearity, 144–148, 155
and resources, 155
and risk, 272–273
and “rules,” 146
and time, 155

Scaling down, 29, 46. See also Prototyping at scale

advantages of, 114–118
and non-tangible aspects of problems, 93–94
and parts, 113–118

Scaling up, 20, 22, 31, 54–55. See also Advocacy

and parts, 113–114
and people, 128, 132–133

Scaling up organizations, 284–309

academic commentary on, 379–381
choosing next steps, 299–301
and efficiency, 292
and flexibility, 301–304
growth as a consequence of, 294–297
and innovating continuously, 323

and original prototype, 287–292
as problem solving, 297–298
and proofs of concept, 297–298
systematizing your prototype, 228, 235, 292–293, 

297–298

on top of old organizations, 286–288, 294, 

293–297

working in the present, 298–301

Schechter, Harry, 288
Schein, Edgar H., 366, 377
Schrage, Michael, 359, 361
Scientific method, 363–365
Self-reliance, 362–363
Self-selection of ideas, 317
Serious Play, 361
Shane, Scott A., 380
6Sigma, 359
Social networks, 96, 129, 303. See also People
Social purpose, 13, 78, 266, 274. See also Ford inno-

vations; Greenpeace

and advocacy, 235

Solutions. See Prototyping problems
Solvable problems, 41
Solving for the problem, 193–195, 227
Space of opportunity

and advocacy, 234, 252–256
and nonlinearity, 148, 150
and process of questions, 204, 211–217
and risk, 269–270, 278–279
and scaling up, 300

Space Station, International, 195–196, 202
Star Trek, 181
Star Trek: The Next Generation, 181
Star Wars, xxiii, xxiv
Statistics

and entrepreneurship, xx
and people, 124–125
and problem solving, 197
role of, 116, 124–125, 197

Story. See also Communication

and advocacy, 241–243, 255, 278–279
and documentation, 338, 343and growth, 285–286

 

INDEX 

395

Stowe, Irving and Dorothy, 12
Structure of Scientific Revolutions, The, 179
Systematizing, 228, 235, 292–293, 297–298

and documentation, 338, 343
and learning, 366

Tangibility, 29, 54, 62, 170

and advocacy, 233, 240, 252
and benefits of innovation prototyping, 29, 172, 

252–253, 274

and documentation, 334, 338
and parts, 82–85, 91–94, 100, 104, 108–109, 114, 

117, 299, 302, 322

and people, 124, 135, 163, 170, 172, 319, 375
making problems tangible, 29–31, 41, 45, 48–50, 
53, 56, 66, 108–109, 162, 179, 203–204, 251, 
319

sketch, diagram, enact, 93 

Teams. See also People

academic commentary on, 375–377
coalescing, 315–316, 318–321
defined, 128–129
role of members, 319, 321

Technology, defined, 109, 152, 371, 384n
Technology push, 19
Temperaturealert, 288
Term sheet, 254–255
Theory of computation, 44, 357, 374
Thomke, Stefan H., 361
Time

and failure, 30–31, 96, 193–196
and nonlinearity, 154–155
and resources, 155
Time travel, 7, 14, 17
Tinkering, xx, 17, 95–96, 178

with impact, 96, 361

TQM, 359
Trial and error, 30, 179, 192–218. See also Failure; 

Prototyping problems
and documentation, 339
and failure, 30–31, 193–196

Turing Machine, 44, 355

Ulrich, Karl, 376
Uncertainty. See also Risk

at beginning, 26, 262
defined, 267–270
and fear, 82–83, 133
and learning, 263–264, 267–270, 275, 277
tolerance for, 268, 270–272, 274, 277

Updating problems and prototypes, 214–217
Ury, William, 380
Utterback, James, 296, 372–373

Vacuum tube, 149
Validation, 278
defined, 201

Value proposition, 237, 248
Venture into the impossible, 343
Verifiable solutions, 41–43, 46, 49–50
Verification, 201

and advocacy, 235, 239–241
recipe, 139

Verne, Jules, 182
Viability, 18, 171, 293

Watson (IBM), 296
Web startup example, 271–272
Weitzman, Martin, 371
Weston, Anthony, 379–380
Willingness to be wrong. See Prototyping problems
Winston, Patrick Henry, 136, 355
Working at scale. See Scaling down; Scaling up
Wozniak, Steve, 23, 132

X-Prize Foundation, 50

YouTube, 15

Zuckerberg, Mark, 303

396 

INDEX

